What Is Weight Training?
The fitness specialty known as weight training is about toning muscles via equipment and gear that provides resistance. Weight training strengthens muscles and improves the physique. For many adults, two to three 20-minute sessions a week are enough to achieve noticeable improvements. 

Through weight training you can target specific muscle groups that you’d like to see increase in strength or size. Practically anyone can lift weights, starting with lighter ones and working their way up. Weight training is beneficial for anyone who wants to develop more physical strength and improve muscle tone. 

 

Fitness Goals
Although those with sports careers definitely benefit from weight training, you don’t have to be a professional athlete to profit from lifting weights. Whatever your fitness goals, strength training can be an essential part of your routine. 

Here are some common goals for which strength training can be beneficial:

Gaining strength
Building muscle mass
Being able to do more push-ups and pull-ups
Having the strength to run races
Building the strength to row or swim for long stretches
Building upper body strength
Increasing leg strength
Rebuilding muscle mass after injury or illness
Growing stronger for work, sports, play, or just because
 
Benefits
Especially when combined with cardio exercise, a weekly routine that incorporates some level of strength training offers numerous benefits. They include:

Healthier bones
Better posture
Improved sleep
Higher energy levels
Stronger muscles
Increased metabolism
Better mood
Improved balance
Increased confidence
 
Equipment
Look around any gym and you’ll find a wide selection of fitness equipment designed for lifting and strength training. Weight training equipment includes:

Home gym combos
Functional trainers
Racks & cages
Benches 
Upper body machines
Lower body machines
Core, abs, & back machines
Grip strengtheners
Training grips & straps
Wrist & ankle weights
Dumbbells
Weight plates
Lifting bars
Kettlebells
Power sleds
And more
 
Real Concerns Associated With Weight Training
Whenever force is used, care is needed. With weight training, you’re lifting heavy objects or pushing against weights to create resistance that builds muscle mass over time. It’s important to use proper techniques to avoid getting hurt. 

These are the main concerns associated with weightlifting and strength training. 

 

Concern 1: Improper Lifting Techniques
Using the wrong techniques to lift weights can result in sprains, fractures, or other injuries. Whether you’re a novice or you’ve been lifting weights for a long time, check to see that you’re using correct posture and applying the right techniques to lift weights to avoid injuring yourself or anyone in your vicinity.

Solution: Work with an experienced training specialist when you’re starting out. Have a trainer check your technique even if you’ve been weight training for a while. 
 
Concern 2: Failing to Warm Up
As with any type of exercise, it’s important to prepare your body for the rigors of weightlifting by warming up. Failing to warm up can lead to injuries, since the muscles aren’t ready yet to support the weight you’re trying to move.

Solution: Warm up prior to strength training by spending at least five minutes stretching, walking, or doing some type of cardio exercise.
 
Concern 3: Lifting Too Much
While we can appreciate enthusiasm for strength training and wanting to work up quickly to lifting heavier weights, don’t overdo it. Take the time that you need to adjust to heavier weights. Trying to lift too much can lead to back injuries and other traumas you’re best off avoiding.

Solution: Don’t lift too much too quickly; work up to heavier weights slowly and conservatively. You’ve got time!
 
Concern 4: Not Letting Your Muscles Recover
If you don’t let your muscles recover in between strength training workout sessions, you’ll pay the price. You run the risk of tearing muscles or overtraining. Without proper rest in between workouts, your body can’t recover from stress, and you may experience unpleasant symptoms including pain, trouble sleeping, decreased performance, fatigued muscles, and weakened immunity.

Solution: Be sure to rest at least a full day in between working out specific muscle groups. 
 
Concern 5: Accidents & Injuries
In weight training, accidents can lead to serious injuries. This is a very real safety concern you must take seriously when lifting weights or using strength training equipment.

Solution: Always follow weight training safety practices, which include working with a spotter, lifting only as much as you can handle, and wearing no-slip shoes. 
 
Concern 6: Unrealistic Expectations
We know you want to get into the best shape of your life quickly, but remember to keep your expectations in check. You won’t sculpt your body overnight. It takes time, discipline, and dedication; with perseverance, you’ll get there.

Solution: Maintain a realistic outlook and trust that over time, you will see the results you’re working towards.  
 
Concern 7: Ignoring Pain
When it comes to weight training, pain is a signal you need to listen to. Ignoring pain and trying to push through it can lead to setbacks, accidents, and injuries.

Solution: Pay attention to pain. If it hurts, stop. Let your body recover, then try again in a few days. Or try again with less weight and resistance. Remember, you can always build up to heavier weights over time as your body increases in strength and endurance. 
 
Who Can Benefit From Weight Lifting & Strength Training?
When done correctly, weight training can be a rewarding part of almost everyone’s fitness program. Weight training is versatile, customizable, and beneficial so long as correct techniques are used and safety precautions are adhered to every time.

Those who can benefit from lifting weights and adding a variety of strength training exercises to their routines include:

Powerlifters
Bodybuilders
Weightlifters
Discus throwers
Hammer throwers
Canoers
Rowers
Basketball players
Rugby players
Wrestlers
Boxers
Gymnasts
Swimmers
Runners
Other athletes
Anyone who wants to build muscle
People who want to sculpt their bodies and improve their physique
Anyone wanting to tone their body
Individuals who wish to build strength, stamina, and endurance
People who desire to look and feel better
Individuals who need more physical strength for their jobs
Those who are recovering from injuries or medical conditions
Anyone who is drawn to strength training for any reason
The beauty of weight training is that it welcomes all levels, abilities, ages, and fitness goals. Whatever attracts you to strength training, know that you can engage in this form of fitness with safety in mind regardless of your current shape. Start where you are, work with a trainer, and work your way up slowly but steadily for the long-term benefits you want. It’s very doable. 

 