Healthy Eating Plan
A healthy eating plan gives your body the nutrients it needs every day while staying within your daily calorie goal for weight loss. A healthy eating plan also will lower your risk for heart disease and other health conditions.

A healthy eating plan:

Emphasizes vegetables, fruits, whole grains, and fat-free or low-fat dairy products
Includes lean meats, poultry, fish, beans, eggs, and nuts
Limits saturated and trans fats, sodium, and added sugars
Controls portion sizes
Calories
To lose weight, most people need to reduce the number of calories they get from food and beverages (energy IN) and increase their physical activity (energy OUT).

For a weight loss of 1–1 ½ pounds per week, daily intake should be reduced by 500 to 750 calories. In general:

Eating plans that contain 1,200–1,500 calories each day will help most women lose weight safely.
Eating plans that contain 1,500–1,800 calories each day are suitable for men and for women who weigh more or who exercise regularly.
Very low calorie diets of fewer than 800 calories per day should not be used unless you are being monitored by your doctor.


Some people choose to follow specific diets to improve their health. You might choose a particular diet because of your medical history, cultural background or personal preferences. Or your healthcare provider might suggest a specific diet to address a medical condition or concern. 

A healthy diet truly benefits your overall well-being. It can:

Lower cholesterol.
Reduce blood pressure.
Keep your weight at a healthy level.
Control blood sugar.
Lessen your risk of heart disease and stroke.
Here are four further specific diets that we recommend.

DASH diet
An eating plan proven to lower blood pressure. 
It combines healthy foods, reduced salt and increased physical activity.
Vegetarian diet
A plant-based diet that can lower your blood pressure, improve cholesterol, help you achieve a healthier weight and lower your risk of type 2 diabetes. 
Can also reduce the risk of heart disease and stroke.
Mediterranean diet
Reduces the risk of heart disease, cancer, Parkinson's, and Alzheimer's. 
Women who follow a Mediterranean diet (supplemented with extra-virgin olive oil and nuts) may have a reduced risk of breast cancer.
MIND diet
A hybrid of the Mediterranean and DASH diets.
Proven to reduce the risk of Alzheimer’s and cognitive decline. Can also protect your heart health.
Even if you don’t follow a specific diet, you can still benefit from modest dietary changes.

Eat more vegetables and fruit

They’re rich in vitamins, minerals and fibre.
They’re low in calories, fat and salt. 
Choose foods higher in fibre
The best sources of fibre are vegetables, fruits, whole grains and legumes such as lentils.

Cut the salt
Reducing your salt intake can help reduce your risk of stroke and heart disease by at least 20%.

Choose healthy fats
Saturated and trans fats raise cholesterol levels. 

Unsaturated fats (found in fish, nuts and vegetable oils) decrease cholesterol.

Cut the added sugar
There is no specific amount of sugar recommended as a part of a healthy diet. 

No more than 10% of calories should come from added sugars. In a 2,000 calorie-a-day diet, that is the equivalent of 48 grams or 12 teaspoons of sugar.  

Added sugar offers no nutritional value.

Eat moderate portions
Fill a half of your plate with vegetables and fruit; a quarter with protein foods and a quarter with whole grains. 

Make water your beverage of choice.

DASH diet
Why DASH?

DASH stands for: Dietary Approaches to Stopping Hypertension

The DASH diet may help lower your blood pressure  (hypertension). It involves eating a diet rich in vegetables, fruit, low-fat dairy, fish, poultry and beans.

It works by controlling your intake of salt, fibre, calcium and potassium.

In research studies, the DASH diet helped reduce blood pressure within two weeks of starting. 
Total cholesterol and "bad cholesterol" (LDL cholesterol) also went down.
Hypertension is a major risk factor for heart disease and stroke.  – a decrease in blood pressure may reduce the risk of heart disease by up to 17% and stroke by up to 27%.


17%
A decrease in blood pressure may reduce the risk of heart disease by up to 17% and stroke by up to 27%.

Vegetarian diet
Why vegetarian?

Cutting out saturated fats that are found in meat can help lower your cholesterol, maintain your weight and improve your health. Becoming a vegetarian is not easy; it is important to make sure you still get all the necessary nutrients from plant foods.

Plant-based foods reduce the total fat, saturated fat and cholesterol found in many meat-based diets.
A vegetarian diet can also give you more fibre, magnesium, potassium, folate and antioxidants such as vitamins C and E. 
Of course, you don't have to be a vegetarian to reap benefits of eating more plant-based foods and less meat. Try these mouth-watering vegetarian recipes.


Mediterranean diet
Why Mediterranean?

This diet focuses on the traditional foods and cooking styles of the countries along the Mediterranean. It incorporates:

Healthy eating with an emphasis on fruit, vegetables, fish and whole grains.
Olive oil instead of butter or other fats.
More herbs and less salt.
Limited red meat.
The occasional glass of red wine (if you drink alcohol)
Research shows that people who follow a Mediterranean diet have a reduced risk of heart disease and lower levels of “bad”  (LDL) cholesterol. It may also prevent other chronic illnesses.

Mind diet
Why Mind?

MIND stands for Mediterranean-DASH Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay. In other words, food that’s good for your brain.

This diet includes a special emphasis on foods specifically linked to brain health, like leafy greens, berries, and nuts. It also limits your intake of red meat, cheese, and sweets.

Research shows that combining these nutritious foods can help reduce inflammation and preserve white matter in the brain. Here’s what that means.

The MIND diet may reduce the rate of developing Alzheimer’s disease by more than 50%.
Even those with modest adherence to the diet may see up to a 35% reduction in the rate of developing Alzheimer’s disease.
It may slow the overall rate of cognitive decline – the equivalent to taking 7½ years off your age. 

Lower your blood pressure. Live longer.
High blood pressure is the number one risk factor for stroke. 


Key facts
A healthy diet helps to protect against malnutrition in all its forms, as well as noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), including diabetes, heart disease, stroke and cancer.
Unhealthy diet and lack of physical activity are leading global risks to health.
Healthy dietary practices start early in life – breastfeeding fosters healthy growth and improves cognitive development, and may have longer term health benefits such as reducing the risk of becoming overweight or obese and developing NCDs later in life.
Energy intake (calories) should be in balance with energy expenditure. To avoid unhealthy weight gain, total fat should not exceed 30% of total energy intake (1, 2, 3). Intake of saturated fats should be less than 10% of total energy intake, and intake of trans-fats less than 1% of total energy intake, with a shift in fat consumption away from saturated fats and trans-fats to unsaturated fats (3), and towards the goal of eliminating industrially-produced trans-fats (4, 5, 6).
Limiting intake of free sugars to less than 10% of total energy intake (2, 7) is part of a healthy diet. A further reduction to less than 5% of total energy intake is suggested for additional health benefits (7).
Keeping salt intake to less than 5 g per day (equivalent to sodium intake of less than 2 g per day) helps to prevent hypertension, and reduces the risk of heart disease and stroke in the adult population (8).
WHO Member States have agreed to reduce the global population’s intake of salt by 30% by 2025; they have also agreed to halt the rise in diabetes and obesity in adults and adolescents as well as in childhood overweight by 2025 (9, 10).
Overview

Consuming a healthy diet throughout the life-course helps to prevent malnutrition in all its forms as well as a range of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) and conditions. However, increased production of processed foods, rapid urbanization and changing lifestyles have led to a shift in dietary patterns. People are now consuming more foods high in energy, fats, free sugars and salt/sodium, and many people do not eat enough fruit, vegetables and other dietary fibre such as whole grains.

The exact make-up of a diversified, balanced and healthy diet will vary depending on individual characteristics (e.g. age, gender, lifestyle and degree of physical activity), cultural context, locally available foods and dietary customs. However, the basic principles of what constitutes a healthy diet remain the same.

For adults
A healthy diet includes the following:

Fruit, vegetables, legumes (e.g. lentils and beans), nuts and whole grains (e.g. unprocessed maize, millet, oats, wheat and brown rice).
At least 400 g (i.e. five portions) of fruit and vegetables per day (2), excluding potatoes, sweet potatoes, cassava and other starchy roots.
Less than 10% of total energy intake from free sugars (2, 7), which is equivalent to 50 g (or about 12 level teaspoons) for a person of healthy body weight consuming about 2000 calories per day, but ideally is less than 5% of total energy intake for additional health benefits (7). Free sugars are all sugars added to foods or drinks by the manufacturer, cook or consumer, as well as sugars naturally present in honey, syrups, fruit juices and fruit juice concentrates.
Less than 30% of total energy intake from fats (1, 2, 3). Unsaturated fats (found in fish, avocado and nuts, and in sunflower, soybean, canola and olive oils) are preferable to saturated fats (found in fatty meat, butter, palm and coconut oil, cream, cheese, ghee and lard) and trans-fats of all kinds, including both industrially-produced trans-fats (found in baked and fried foods, and pre-packaged snacks and foods, such as frozen pizza, pies, cookies, biscuits, wafers, and cooking oils and spreads) and ruminant trans-fats (found in meat and dairy foods from ruminant animals, such as cows, sheep, goats and camels). It is suggested that the intake of saturated fats be reduced to less than 10% of total energy intake and trans-fats to less than 1% of total energy intake (5). In particular, industrially-produced trans-fats are not part of a healthy diet and should be avoided (4, 6).
Less than 5  g of salt (equivalent to about one teaspoon) per day (8).  Salt should be iodized.
For infants and young children
In the first 2 years of a child’s life, optimal nutrition fosters healthy growth and improves cognitive development. It also reduces the risk of becoming overweight or obese and developing NCDs later in life.

Advice on a healthy diet for infants and children is similar to that for adults, but the following elements are also important:

Infants should be breastfed exclusively during the first 6 months of life.
Infants should be breastfed continuously until 2 years of age and beyond.
From 6 months of age, breast milk should be complemented with a variety of adequate, safe and nutrient-dense foods. Salt and sugars should not be added to complementary foods.
Practical advice on maintaining a healthy diet
Fruit and vegetables
Eating at least 400 g, or five portions, of fruit and vegetables per day reduces the risk of NCDs (2) and helps to ensure an adequate daily intake of dietary fibre.

Fruit and vegetable intake can be improved by:

always including vegetables in meals;
eating fresh fruit and raw vegetables as snacks;
eating fresh fruit and vegetables that are in season; and
eating a variety of fruit and vegetables.
Fats
Reducing the amount of total fat intake to less than 30% of total energy intake helps to prevent unhealthy weight gain in the adult population (1, 2, 3). Also, the risk of developing NCDs is lowered by:

reducing saturated fats to less than 10% of total energy intake;
reducing trans-fats to less than 1% of total energy intake; and
replacing both saturated fats and trans-fats with unsaturated fats (2, 3) – in particular, with polyunsaturated fats.
Fat intake, especially saturated fat and industrially-produced trans-fat intake, can be reduced by:

steaming or boiling instead of frying when cooking;
replacing butter, lard and ghee with oils rich in polyunsaturated fats, such as soybean, canola (rapeseed), corn, safflower and sunflower oils;
eating reduced-fat dairy foods and lean meats, or trimming visible fat from meat; and
limiting the consumption of baked and fried foods, and pre-packaged snacks and foods (e.g. doughnuts, cakes, pies, cookies, biscuits and wafers) that contain industrially-produced trans-fats.
Salt, sodium and potassium
Most people consume too much sodium through salt (corresponding to consuming an average of 9–12 g of salt per day) and not enough potassium (less than 3.5 g). High sodium intake and insufficient potassium intake contribute to high blood pressure, which in turn increases the risk of heart disease and stroke (8, 11).

Reducing salt intake to the recommended level of less than 5 g per day could prevent 1.7 million deaths each year (12).

People are often unaware of the amount of salt they consume. In many countries, most salt  comes from processed foods (e.g. ready meals; processed meats such as bacon, ham and salami; cheese; and salty snacks) or from foods consumed frequently in large amounts (e.g. bread). Salt is also added to foods during cooking (e.g. bouillon, stock cubes, soy sauce and fish sauce) or at the point of consumption (e.g. table salt).

Salt intake can be reduced by:

limiting the amount of salt and high-sodium condiments (e.g. soy sauce, fish sauce and bouillon) when cooking and preparing foods;
not having salt or high-sodium sauces on the table;
limiting the consumption of salty snacks; and
choosing products with lower sodium content.
Some food manufacturers are reformulating recipes to reduce the sodium content of their products, and people should be encouraged to check nutrition labels to see how much sodium is in a product before purchasing or consuming it.

Potassium can mitigate the negative effects of elevated sodium consumption on blood pressure. Intake of potassium can be increased by consuming fresh fruit and vegetables.

Sugars
In both adults and children, the intake of free sugars should be reduced to less than 10% of total energy intake (2, 7).  A reduction to less than 5% of total energy intake would provide additional health benefits (7).

Consuming free sugars increases the risk of dental caries (tooth decay). Excess calories from foods and drinks high in free sugars also contribute to unhealthy weight gain, which can lead to overweight and obesity. Recent evidence also shows that free sugars influence blood pressure and serum lipids, and suggests that a reduction in free sugars intake reduces risk factors for cardiovascular diseases (13).

Sugars intake can be reduced by:

limiting the consumption of foods and drinks containing high amounts of sugars, such as sugary snacks, candies and sugar-sweetened beverages (i.e. all types of beverages containing free sugars – these include carbonated or non‐carbonated soft drinks, fruit or vegetable juices and drinks, liquid and powder concentrates, flavoured water, energy and sports drinks, ready‐to‐drink tea, ready‐to‐drink coffee and flavoured milk drinks); and
eating fresh fruit and raw vegetables as snacks instead of sugary snacks.
How to promote healthy diets
Diet evolves over time, being influenced by many social and economic factors that interact in a complex manner to shape individual dietary patterns. These factors include income, food prices (which will affect the availability and affordability of healthy foods), individual preferences and beliefs, cultural traditions, and geographical and environmental aspects (including climate change). Therefore, promoting a healthy food environment – including food systems that promote a diversified, balanced and healthy diet – requires the involvement of multiple sectors and stakeholders, including government, and the public and private sectors.

Governments have a central role in creating a healthy food environment that enables people to adopt and maintain healthy dietary practices. Effective actions by policy-makers to create a healthy food environment include the following:

Creating coherence in national policies and investment plans – including trade, food and agricultural policies – to promote a healthy diet and protect public health through:

increasing incentives for producers and retailers to grow, use and sell fresh fruit and vegetables;
reducing incentives for the food industry to continue or increase production of processed foods containing high levels of saturated fats, trans-fats, free sugars and salt/sodium;
encouraging reformulation of food products to reduce the contents of saturated fats, trans-fats, free sugars and salt/sodium, with the goal of eliminating industrially-produced trans-fats;
implementing the WHO recommendations on the marketing of foods and non-alcoholic beverages to children;
establishing standards to foster healthy dietary practices through ensuring the availability of healthy, nutritious, safe and affordable foods in pre-schools, schools, other public institutions and the workplace;
exploring regulatory and voluntary instruments (e.g. marketing regulations and nutrition labelling policies), and economic incentives or disincentives (e.g. taxation and subsidies) to promote a healthy diet; and
encouraging transnational, national and local food services and catering outlets to improve the nutritional quality of their foods – ensuring the availability and affordability of healthy choices – and review portion sizes and pricing.
Encouraging consumer demand for healthy foods and meals through:

promoting consumer awareness of a healthy diet;
developing school policies and programmes that encourage children to adopt and maintain a healthy diet;
educating children, adolescents and adults about nutrition and healthy dietary practices;
encouraging culinary skills, including in children through schools;
supporting point-of-sale information, including through nutrition labelling that ensures accurate, standardized and comprehensible information on nutrient contents in foods (in line with the Codex Alimentarius Commission guidelines), with the addition of front-of-pack labelling to facilitate consumer understanding; and
providing nutrition and dietary counselling at primary health-care facilities.
Promoting appropriate infant and young child feeding practices through:

implementing the International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes and subsequent relevant World Health Assembly resolutions;
implementing policies and practices to promote protection of working mothers; and
promoting, protecting and supporting breastfeeding in health services and the community, including through the Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative.
WHO response
The “WHO Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health” (14) was adopted in 2004 by the Health Assembly. The strategy called on governments, WHO, international partners, the private sector and civil society to take action at global, regional and local levels to support healthy diets and physical activity.

In 2010, the Health Assembly endorsed a set of recommendations on the marketing of foods and non-alcoholic beverages to children (15). These recommendations guide countries in designing new policies and improving existing ones to reduce the impact on children of the marketing of foods and non-alcoholic beverages to children. WHO has also developed region-specific tools (such as regional nutrient profile models) that countries can use to implement the marketing recommendations.

In 2012, the Health Assembly adopted a “Comprehensive Implementation Plan on Maternal, Infant and Young Child Nutrition” and six global nutrition targets to be achieved by 2025, including the reduction of stunting, wasting and overweight in children, the improvement of breastfeeding, and the reduction of anaemia and low birthweight (9).

In 2013, the Health Assembly agreed to nine global voluntary targets for the prevention and control of NCDs. These targets include a halt to the rise in diabetes and obesity, and a 30% relative reduction in the intake of salt by 2025. The “Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases 2013–2020” (10) provides guidance and policy options for Member States, WHO and other United Nations agencies to achieve the targets.

With many countries now seeing a rapid rise in obesity among infants and children, in May 2014 WHO set up the Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity. In 2016, the Commission proposed a set of recommendations to successfully tackle childhood and adolescent obesity in different contexts around the world (16).

In November 2014, WHO organized, jointly with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the Second International Conference on Nutrition (ICN2). ICN2 adopted the Rome Declaration on Nutrition (17), and the Framework for Action (18) which recommends a set of policy options and strategies to promote diversified, safe and healthy diets at all stages of life. WHO is helping countries to implement the commitments made at ICN2.

In May 2018, the Health Assembly approved the 13th General Programme of Work (GPW13), which will guide the work of WHO in 2019–2023 (19). Reduction of salt/sodium intake and elimination of industrially-produced trans-fats from the food supply are identified in GPW13 as part of WHO’s priority actions to achieve the aims of ensuring healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages. To support Member States in taking necessary actions to eliminate industrially-produced trans-fats, WHO has developed a roadmap for countries (the REPLACE action package) to help accelerate actions (6). 


The use of strength training and strength exercises has been part of sports conditioning for many years. It’s touted for its beneficial effect on speed, strength, endurance, agility, and muscle mass.

The increase in speed, strength, agility and muscular endurance will benefit athletes of every sport.

However, an often overlooked benefit is injury prevention. Strength training is a major component of any injury prevention or injury management program.

“When properly performed, strength training can provide significant functional benefits and improvement in overall health and well-being, including increased bone, muscle, tendon, and ligament strength and toughness, improved joint function, reduced potential for injury, increased bone density, increased metabolism, increased fitness and improved cardiac function.”

What is Strength Training?
Strength training is moving the joints through a range of motion against resistance, requiring the muscles to expend energy and contract forcefully to move the bones.

Strength training can be done using various types of resistance, with or without equipment. Strength training is used to strengthen the muscles, tendons, bones and ligaments and to increase muscle mass. Strength training should be implemented in the conditioning program of all sports, not just strength sports.

3 Types of Strength Training
Strength training comes in a variety of formats. The formats are defined by the type of resistance and equipment used. The 3 main types of strength training include:

Machine Weights
Machine Weights
Machine strength training includes resistance exercises done using any of the various machines designed to produce resistance.

These include machines with weight stacks, hydraulics, resistance rods or bands, and even the use of Thera-Band or resistance tubing.

The resistance (or weight) may be changed to increase the intensity of the exercise. The range of motion and position of movement is controlled by the machine. The resistance may be constant throughout the movement or may change due to the set-up of the pulley and cam systems.

Machines often add a degree of safety but neglect the stabilizer, or helper, muscles in a movement.

Free Weights
Free Weights
Free weight strength training involves using weights that are not fixed in a movement pattern by a machine.

These include barbells and dumbbells. Also included in this group are kettle-bells, medicine balls, ankle and wrist weights, and weight lifting chains.

The weight used, as with the machines, may be changed to increase the resistance of an exercise. The resistance at different points along the range of motion transfers to different muscles and due to angles may lessen at times. At the lockout of a joint the weight is transferred to the joint as the muscles simply stabilize the joint.

The range of motion and path of movement is not limited, so the stabilizing muscles must work to keep the joints in line during the movement. Due to the fact that the movement is not fixed poor form can become an issue.

Own Body-Weight Exercises
Own Body-Weight Exercises
Body-weight exercises involve utilizing the athlete’s body-weight as resistance during the exercise. As with free weights, the range and path of motion is not fixed by a machine.

These include exercises such as plyometrics, push-ups, pull-ups, abdominal exercises, even sprinting and jumping rope, fall into this category.

The weight used in these exercises is constant and only changes when the athlete’s body changes. The changes in resistance during the movement are similar to those of free weight exercises. The range of motion and path of movement does not follow a fixed path so stabilizing muscles come into play.

Form is again an issue with these exercises. The inability to change the weight used does limit the effectiveness for some athletes.

How does Strength Training prevent injury?
Strength training in athletics is common practice today. The benefits are obvious and the immediate crossover of those benefits to the playing field makes it ideal for off-season conditioning. Injury prevention however, is one benefit that is often overlooked. Strength training is a very effective tool for injury prevention for a variety of reasons.

Strength training improves the strength of the muscles, tendons, and even the ligaments and bones. Stronger muscles and tendons help hold the body in proper alignment and protect the bones and joints when moving or under impact. The bones become stronger due to the overload placed on them during training and the ligaments become more flexible and better at absorbing the shock applied to them during dynamic movements.
When an area of the body is used less during an activity it may become weak compared to other areas. This can become a problem when that area (whether a muscle, ligament, joint, or specific bone) is called into play suddenly during an activity. That area cannot handle the sudden stress placed on it and an injury occurs. Strength training, using a balanced program, will eliminate these weak areas and balance the body for the activities it is called to do.
Muscle imbalances are one of the most common causes of injuries in athletics. When one muscle, or muscle group, becomes stronger than its opposing group, the weaker muscles become fatigued quicker and are more susceptible to injury. A forceful contraction, near maximal output from the stronger muscle can also cause damage to the weaker opposing muscle due to the inability to counter the force.
Muscle imbalances also affect the joints and bones due to an abnormal pull causing the joint to move in an unnatural pattern. The stronger muscles will cause the joint to pull in that direction causing a stretching of the opposing ligaments and a tightening of the supporting ones. These can lead to chronic pain and an unnatural wearing of the bones. A balanced strength training program will help to counter these effects by strengthening the weaker muscles to balance them with their counterparts.
Precautions for Strength Training
Strength training is a great tool for injury prevention; however, becoming injured during strength training obviously defeats this purpose. Below are some important precautions and safety guidelines to adhere to while performing any strength training exercises.

If you’ve never done any sort of strength training before, even if you consider yourself quite fit, start off slowly. The nature of strength training is quite different to any other form of exercise. It places different demand on the body, and if you’re not used to it, it will take a little time for your body to adapt to this new form of training. Be patient.
To avoid injury it is essential that proper form be used in all exercises. Keeping the body in proper alignment while exercising will minimize the injury chances. Starting with light weights or resistance and developing proper form before increasing the resistance is important. When increasing the resistance it is important to do so in small increments and only when the desired number of repetitions can be performed in correct form.
Rest plays a crucial role in the efficiency and safety of a training program. Performing strength training exercises for the same muscle groups without adequate rest between the training sessions can lead to overtraining. Overtraining will result in the muscles being unable to repair properly and not being ready for additional work. This can lead to acute or chronic injuries. The muscles repair and become stronger during rest, not during the workout.
A thorough and correct warm-up will help to prepare the muscles and tendons for any strength training exercises. Without a proper warm-up the muscles and tendons may be tight and stiff. Before any strength training activity, be sure to thoroughly warm-up all the muscles and tendons that will be used during the workout.
Flexible muscles are extremely important in the prevention of strength training injuries. When muscles and tendons are flexible and supple, they are able to move and perform without being over stretched. If however, your muscles and tendons are tight and stiff, it is quite easy for those muscles and tendons to be pushed beyond their natural range of movement. To keep your muscles and tendons flexible and supple, it is important to undertake a structured flexibility training program.



Athletes may have a love-hate relationship with rest day, but it’s important for your body’s recovery. Everyone from college athletes to marathon runners should build rest days into their training schedule. Overtraining can lead to exhaustion, sore muscles, and moodiness, which may also make athletes more susceptible to illness or injury. Although it may seem counterintuitive, rest days can actually improve athletic performance. Here are 6 things that athletes should be doing to make the most of their rest days.

LISTEN TO YOUR BODY
First things first, no one knows your body as well as you do. When rest day comes around, take some time in the morning to assess how you feel. What is your body telling you that you need to recover? It could be more sleep, light exercise, certain foods or a combination of all of these.

GET ADEQUATE SLEEP
Mental and physical rest is equally important when letting your body recover. The average person needs 7-9 hours of sleep per night, but athletes in training may need more. Sleep has been proven to increase mental sharpness, speed and reaction time in athletes. Plan ahead to get those Zzzs!

HYDRATE, HYDRATE, HYDRATE
Athletes know how important it is to hydrate during and after a workout, but that mentality should carry over into off days as well. Water acts as a lubricant for muscles and joints, helping athletes to avoid muscle cramps and soreness. Water is not the only answer; you can also incorporate sports drinks and hydrate through foods such as watermelon, strawberries and cantaloupe.

EAT RIGHT
Carbs provide energy for when you’re hitting the gym, but on rest days it can be smart to limit them. Instead focus on lean protein, (which helps muscles recover), fresh fruits and veggies. Think of your plate as a rainbow, including as many colors as possible. The vitamins and minerals in these foods play an important role in recovery. For example, red or orange fruits and vegetables provide beta carotene and other antioxidants to reduce inflammation.

STAY ACTIVE
Rest day is the perfect opportunity to take advantage of low impact workouts such as yoga or Pilates. Or simply take a walk. The idea is to take a break from those hardcore gym workouts, yet keep your body moving. Aim for 30-45 minutes of light recovery exercise on rest day.

STRETCH OR FOAM ROLL
Taking a few minutes to stretch daily can greatly improve flexibility and may help alleviate tight muscles. However, these moves are especially important on rest days because they can help speed recovery. Using a foam roller provides a self-myofascial massage, shown to reduce muscle soreness and improve range of motion when done after a workout.

Consistently training to be in peak performance requires a lot of hard work and sweat. Make sure you schedule time to reward yourself with mental and physical rest. Rest days allow athletes to recharge, which can improve future performance.




Want to reduce body fat, increase lean muscle mass and burn calories more efficiently? Strength training to the rescue! Strength training is a key component of overall health and fitness for everyone.

Use it or lose it
Lean muscle mass naturally diminishes with age.

Your body fat percentage will increase over time if you don't do anything to replace the lean muscle you lose over time. Strength training can help you preserve and enhance your muscle mass at any age.

Strength training may also help you:

Develop strong bones. By stressing your bones, strength training can increase bone density and reduce the risk of osteoporosis.
Manage your weight. Strength training can help you manage or lose weight, and it can increase your metabolism to help you burn more calories.
Enhance your quality of life. Strength training may enhance your quality of life and improve your ability to do everyday activities. Strength training can also protect your joints from injury. Building muscle also can contribute to better balance and may reduce your risk of falls. This can help you maintain independence as you age.
Manage chronic conditions. Strength training can reduce the signs and symptoms of many chronic conditions, such as arthritis, back pain, obesity, heart disease, depression and diabetes.
Sharpen your thinking skills. Some research suggests that regular strength training and aerobic exercise may help improve thinking and learning skills for older adults.
Consider the options
Strength training can be done at home or in the gym. Common choices may include:

Body weight. You can do many exercises with little or no equipment. Try pushups, pullups, planks, lunges and squats.
Resistance tubing. Resistance tubing is inexpensive, lightweight tubing that provides resistance when stretched. You can choose from many types of resistance tubes in nearly any sporting goods store or online.
Free weights. Barbells and dumbbells are classic strength training tools. If you don't have weights at home, you can use soup cans. Other options can include using medicine balls or kettle bells.
Weight machines. Most fitness centers offer various resistance machines. You can invest in weight machines for use at home, too.
Cable suspension training. Cable suspension training is another option to try. In cable suspension training, you suspend part of your body — such as your legs — while doing body weight training such as pushups or planks.
Getting started
If you have a chronic condition, or if you're older than age 40 and you haven't been active recently, check with your doctor before beginning a strength training or aerobic fitness program.

Before beginning strength training, consider warming up with brisk walking or another aerobic activity for five or 10 minutes. Cold muscles are more prone to injury than are warm muscles.

Choose a weight or resistance level heavy enough to tire your muscles after about 12 to 15 repetitions. When you can easily do more repetitions of a certain exercise, gradually increase the weight or resistance.

Research shows that a single set of 12 to 15 repetitions with the proper weight can build muscle efficiently in most people and can be as effective as three sets of the same exercise. As long as you take the muscle you are working to fatigue — meaning you can't lift another repetition — you are doing the work necessary to make the muscle stronger. And fatiguing at a higher number of repetitions means you likely are using a lighter weight, which will make it easier for you to control and maintain correct form.

To give your muscles time to recover, rest one full day between exercising each specific muscle group.

Also be careful to listen to your body. If a strength training exercise causes pain, stop the exercise. Consider trying a lower weight or trying it again in a few days.

It's important to use proper technique in strength training to avoid injuries. If you're new to strength training, work with a trainer or other fitness specialist to learn correct form and technique. Remember to breathe as you strength train.

When to expect results
You don't need to spend hours a day lifting weights to benefit from strength training. You can see significant improvement in your strength with just two or three 20- or 30-minute strength training sessions a week.

For most healthy adults, the Department of Health and Human Services recommends these exercise guidelines:

Aerobic activity. Get at least 150 minutes of moderate aerobic activity or 75 minutes of vigorous aerobic activity a week, or a combination of moderate and vigorous activity. The guidelines suggest that you spread out this exercise during the course of a week. Greater amounts of exercise will provide even greater health benefits. But even small amounts of physical activity are helpful. Being active for short periods of time throughout the day can add up to provide health benefits.
Strength training. Do strength training exercises for all major muscle groups at least two times a week. Aim to do a single set of each exercise, using a weight or resistance level heavy enough to tire your muscles after about 12 to 15 repetitions.
As you incorporate strength training exercises into your fitness routine, you may notice improvement in your strength over time. As your muscle mass increases, you'll likely be able to lift weight more easily and for longer periods of time. If you keep it up, you can continue to increase your strength, even if you're not in shape when you begin.

