Muscle Directory: Complete List of All Exercises
Here is our complete list of strength training exercises, sorted by muscle group.


Chest Exercises
Bar Dip
Bench Press
Cable Chest Press
Close-Grip Bench Press
Close-Grip Feet-Up Bench Press
Decline Bench Press
Dumbbell Chest Fly
Dumbbell Chest Press
Dumbbell Decline Chest Press
Dumbbell Floor Press
Dumbbell Pullover
Feet-Up Bench Press
Floor Press
Incline Bench Press
Incline Dumbbell Press
Incline Push-Up
Kneeling Incline Push-Up
Kneeling Push-Up
Machine Chest Fly
Machine Chest Press
Pec Deck
Push-Up
Push-Up Against Wall
Push-Ups With Feet in Rings
Resistance Band Chest Fly
Smith Machine Bench Press
Smith Machine Incline Bench Press
Standing Cable Chest Fly
Standing Resistance Band Chest Fly
Shoulder Exercises
Band External Shoulder Rotation
Band Internal Shoulder Rotation
Band Pull-Apart
Barbell Front Raise
Barbell Rear Delt Row
Barbell Upright Row
Behind the Neck Press
Cable Lateral Raise
Cable Rear Delt Row
Dumbbell Front Raise
Dumbbell Horizontal Internal Shoulder Rotation
Dumbbell Horizontal External Shoulder Rotation
Dumbbell Lateral Raise
Dumbbell Rear Delt Row
Dumbbell Shoulder Press
Face Pull
Front Hold
Lying Dumbbell External Shoulder Rotation
Lying Dumbbell Internal Shoulder Rotation
Machine Lateral Raise
Machine Shoulder Press
Monkey Row
Overhead Press
Plate Front Raise
Power Jerk
Push Press
Reverse Cable Flyes
Reverse Dumbbell Flyes
Reverse Machine Fly
Seated Dumbbell Shoulder Press
Seated Barbell Overhead Press
Seated Smith Machine Shoulder Press
Snatch Grip Behind the Neck Press
Squat Jerk
Split Jerk

Bicep Exercises
Barbell Curl
Barbell Preacher Curl
Bodyweight Curl
Cable Curl With Bar
Cable Curl With Rope
Concentration Curl
Dumbbell Curl
Dumbbell Preacher Curl
Hammer Curl
Incline Dumbbell Curl
Machine Bicep Curl
Spider Curl
Triceps Exercises
Barbell Standing Triceps Extension
Barbell Lying Triceps Extension
Bench Dip
Close-Grip Push-Up
Dumbbell Lying Triceps Extension
Dumbbell Standing Triceps Extension
Overhead Cable Triceps Extension
Tricep Bodyweight Extension
Tricep Pushdown With Bar
Tricep Pushdown With Rope

Leg Exercises
Air Squat
Barbell Hack Squat
Barbell Lunge
Barbell Walking Lunge
Belt Squat
Body Weight Lunge
Box Squat
Bulgarian Split Squat
Chair Squat
Dumbbell Lunge
Dumbbell Squat
Front Squat
Goblet Squat
Hack Squat Machine
Half Air Squat
Hip Adduction Machine
Landmine Hack Squat
Landmine Squat
Leg Extension
Leg Press
Lying Leg Curl
Pause Squat
Romanian Deadlift
Safety Bar Squat
Seated Leg Curl
Shallow Body Weight Lunge
Side Lunges (Bodyweight)
Smith Machine Squat
Squat
Step Up
Back Exercises
Back Extension
Barbell Row
Barbell Shrug
Block Snatch
Cable Close Grip Seated Row
Cable Wide Grip Seated Row
Chin-Up
Clean
Clean and Jerk
Deadlift
Deficit Deadlift
Dumbbell Deadlift
Dumbbell Row
Dumbbell Shrug
Floor Back Extension
Good Morning
Hang Clean
Hang Power Clean
Hang Power Snatch
Hang Snatch
Inverted Row
Inverted Row with Underhand Grip
Jefferson Curl
Kettlebell Swing
Lat Pulldown With Pronated Grip
Lat Pulldown With Supinated Grip
One-Handed Cable Row
One-Handed Lat Pulldown
Pause Deadlift
Pendlay Row
Power Clean
Power Snatch
Pull-Up
Rack Pull
Seal Row
Seated Machine Row
Snatch
Snatch Grip Deadlift
Stiff-Legged Deadlift
Straight Arm Lat Pulldown
Sumo Deadlift
T-Bar Row
Trap Bar Deadlift With High Handles
Trap Bar Deadlift With Low Handles

Glute Exercises
Banded Side Kicks
Cable Pull Through
Clamshells
Dumbbell Romanian Deadlift
Dumbbell Frog Pumps
Fire Hydrants
Frog Pumps
Glute Bridge
Hip Abduction Against Band
Hip Abduction Machine
Hip Thrust
Hip Thrust Machine
Hip Thrust With Band Around Knees
Lateral Walk With Band
Machine Glute Kickbacks
One-Legged Glute Bridge
One-Legged Hip Thrust
Romanian Deadlift
Single Leg Romanian Deadlift
Standing Glute Kickback in Machine
Step Up

Ab Exercises
Cable Crunch
Crunch
Dead Bug
Hanging Leg Raise
Hanging Knee Raise
Hanging Sit-Up
High to Low Wood Chop with Band
Horizontal Wood Chop with Band
Kneeling Ab Wheel Roll-Out
Kneeling Plank
Kneeling Side Plank
Lying Leg Raise
Lying Windshield Wiper
Lying Windshield Wiper with Bent Knees
Machine Crunch
Mountain Climbers
Oblique Crunch
Oblique Sit-Up
Plank
Side Plank
Sit-Up
Calves Exercises
Eccentric Heel Drop
Heel Raise
Seated Calf Raise
Standing Calf Raise
Forearm Flexors & Grip Exercises
Barbell Wrist Curl
Barbell Wrist Curl Behind the Back
Bar Hang
Dumbbell Wrist Curl
Farmers Walk
Fat Bar Deadlift
Gripper
One-Handed Bar Hang
Plate Pinch
Plate Wrist Curl
Towel Pull-Up
Forearm Extensor Exercises
Barbell Wrist Extension
Dumbbell Wrist Extension
Cardio Exercises & Equipment
Rowing Machine
Stationary Bike
The Best Strength Training Exercises for Every Body Part
This is our recommended list of the best strength training exercises for every major muscle group.

These are time-tested classics that have proven their effectiveness both in the trenches and in the research labs. Which exercise is best for you will depend on your anatomy, background, and preferences, but this list should give you a starting point.


For most of the muscle groups below, we try to list at least one compound exercise and one isolation exercise. By combining two or three of the strength exercises listed for each muscle group, you should be able to work most of the muscle fibers of the target muscles effectively.

Chest
Bench Press
Incline Dumbbell Press
Bar Dips
Standing Cable Chest Fly
Read more about the best chest exercises.

Shoulders
Overhead Press
Seated Dumbbell Shoulder Press
Dumbbell Lateral Raise
Reverse Dumbbell Fly
Read more about the best shoulder exercises.

Back
Deadlift
Lat Pulldown
Pull-Up
Barbell Row
Dumbbell Row
Read more: How to Train Your Back Muscles

Biceps
Barbell Curl
Dumbbell Curl
Hammer Curl
Read more: How to Train Your Biceps

Triceps
Barbell Lying Triceps Extension
Overhead Cable Triceps Extension
Tricep Pushdown
Close-Grip Bench Press
Read more about the best tricep exercises.

Quadriceps
Squat
Hack Squats
Leg Extension
Bulgarian Split Squat
Read more: How to Train Your Quad Muscles

Hamstrings
Seated Leg Curl
Lying Leg Curl
Romanian Deadlift
Read more: How to Train Your Hamstring Muscles

Glutes
Squat
Hip Thrust
Romanian Deadlift
Bulgarian Split Squat

Read more: How to Train Your Glute Muscles

Abs
Cable Crunch
Hanging Leg Raise
High to Low Wood Chop
Crunch
Read more: How to Train Your Abs

Calves
Standing Calf Raise
Seated Calf Raise
Read more: How to Train Your Calf Muscles

Related articles:

How Many Exercises Should You Do per Muscle Group?
Top 20 Bodybuilding Exercises for Every Muscle Group
Top 20 Powerlifting Exercises For Strength & Mass
What Are the Four Basic Strength Training Exercises?
The four basic strength training exercises refer to the four fundamental movements of resistance training.

They are four movements that, together, cover a large part of what we can do with our bodies.

The idea is that if you do at least one exercise for each fundamental movement, you will have worked almost all your major muscle groups.

At least one exercise from each of these four basic movements should be included in every comprehensive strength training program.

The four fundamental movements are:

Push something away from you. Examples: bench press, overhead press, push-ups, machine chest press.
Pull something towards you. Examples: pull-ups, lat pulldown, barbell row, dumbbell row, cable row.
Hip hinge. Examples: deadlift, good morning, Romanian deadlift, clean, kettlebell swing.
Squat. Examples: squat, front squat, Bulgarian split squat, goblet squat, leg press.
Push, pull, hinge, and squat. That’s it.

Push Pull Hip Hinge Squat Exercises
The bench press, barbell row, deadlift, and squat. Four exercises, four fundamental movements.


Generally speaking:

Pushing exercises work your chest, shoulders, and triceps.
Pulling exercises work your lats, traps, and biceps.
Hip hinge exercises work your lower back, glutes, and hamstrings.
Squat exercises work your quads, glutes, and adductors.
Pick one exercise from each category and train it once or more per week, and you will have an excellent strength training program for basically your entire body.

If you train with a barbell and pick one exercise from each category, it might be bench press, barbell row, deadlift, and squat.
If you train with kettlebells, it might be kettlebell press, kettlebell row, kettlebell swing, and goblet squat or front squat with the kettlebells in the rack position.
If you train with machines, it might be chest press, machine row, back extension, and leg press.
Additions to the Four Basic Movements
Can’t we leave a nice thing alone?

Alright.

If you want to get fancy, there are two things you can add.

1. Abdominal Training
While the back of your core gets plenty of training in most hip hinge and squat exercises, your abs and obliques (the front and sides) don’t.

To rectify this, you could add an ab exercise from the list of exercises above.

2. Vertical and Horizontal Pushing and Pulling
For even more comprehensive upper body training, you could split up the pushing and pulling movements into horizontal and vertical planes of motion.

Horizontal movements have your arm working about 90 degrees out from your body, i.e. where the arm would be horizontal if you were standing upright. Examples:
Horizontal pushes: bench press, dumbbell chest press, and push-ups.
Horizontal pulls: barbell row, dumbbell row, and cable row.
Vertical movements have your arm working over your head. Examples:
Vertical pushes: overhead press, dumbbell shoulder press, and kettlebell press.
Vertical pulls: lat pulldown and pull-up.
Horizontal and vertical movements will emphasize slightly different muscles, or different regions in large muscles, and can thus lead to more complete training.

What Makes a Strength Training Exercise Good For Building Muscle?
An exercise is effective for building muscle if it:



Works the muscle through a long range of motion.
Is stable enough for your muscle power to be the limiting factor, and not your balance.
Trains multiple muscles simultaneously (these exercises are often called compound exercises).
Of course, you don’t have to train several muscles in the same exercise, but it is time-effective to use compound exercises as they will help you train all your major muscle groups more quickly.

Is There One Exercise That Works the Entire Body?
Not that we’re aware of. But …

A lot of people would say the deadlift.

Deadlift
The deadlift.
While the deadlift certainly uses a lot of muscle mass at the same time, it doesn’t work all major muscle groups.

Deadlift muscles worked


The deadlift primarily works your posterior chain: your glutes, lower back, hamstrings, adductors, traps, and of course grip.

This leaves out the muscles in your upper arms, shoulders, lats, and abdominals. Your quads aren’t worked very effective either.

Another exercise that comes to mind is the clean and jerk (or clean and press). The clean and jerk basically combines a deadlift-like movement with an overhead jerk, adding some work for your legs, shoulders and arms.

Clean and jerk weight lifting exercise
You might argue, however, that the clean and jerk is actually two exercises combined (the clean and the jerk), and thus not “one exercise for the whole body”.

No matter how you slice it, both the deadlift and clean and jerk are still two fantastic exercises, and if one of them was all you ever did, you would still do pretty good.

Are Free Weight Exercises Better Than Machines?
Free weights refer to all kinds of training equipment that isn’t attached to something. The most common ones being barbells, dumbbells and kettlebells.



Machines refer to training equipment that is fixed in one way or another. For example, it could be machines for leg presses or leg extensions, or smith machines.

While some may preach the superiority of one or the other, the truth is that free weights and machines both have their pros and cons that you should consider when planning your training.

To learn which is better for your goals, check out our article on free weights vs. machines.

