There is no right or wrong way to create a strength training routine. However, pairing certain muscle groups together can help make your workouts more efficient.

When many people think of working out, they think of aerobic exercises like jogging or biking. These types of exercises are important for strengthening your heart and lungs, but a complete training program should also include strength exercises, flexibility training, and balance training.

Regular strength training improves the health of your bones, muscles, and connective tissue. Building stronger muscles also raises your metabolic rate and helps you maintain a healthy weight. The U.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesTrusted Source recommends strength training two or more times per week for optimal health.

There are many ways to structure a strength training program, but many people find it helpful to pair certain muscle groups together. Working out different body parts on different days gives your muscles more rest between workouts and helps you prevent overtraining.

In this article, we’re going to look at which muscles groups you may want to combine. We’ll also provide you with samples of how you could set up your weekly training schedule.

Muscle groups
There are three types of muscles in your body: cardiac, smooth, and skeletal. Cardiac muscles are the muscles that control your heart. Smooth muscles control involuntary functions like constricting your blood vessels. Skeletal muscles are the muscles that you target in the gym that help your body move. They make up about 40 percentTrusted Source of your body weight.

Many fitness experts often consider these to be the major muscle groups in your body:

chest
back
arms
abdominals
legs
shoulders
Some people also divide these muscle groups into more specific categories such as:

calves (lower leg)
hamstrings (back of upper leg)
quadriceps (front of upper leg)
glutes (butt and hips)
biceps (front of upper arms)
triceps (back of upper arms)
forearms (lower arm)
trapezius (traps) (top of shoulders)
latissimus dorsi (lats) (under the armpits)
Working multiple muscles
Few exercises truly isolate only one muscle group. For example, the biceps curl is one of the most common exercises to strengthen the biceps in the front of your upper arm. However, several other muscles also help your body flex at the elbow including brachialis, which is beneath your biceps, and brachioradialis, which is a large muscle in your forearm. Other stabilizer muscles need to brace your shoulder and core so you can efficiently lift the weight.

When designing your program, you may find some exercises fit into more than one category. In general, the more joints that bend in an exercise, the more muscle groups you’re using.



What to pair together?
There’s no right way to group your muscles together. You may want to experiment with a few different pairings until you find one that works best for you. If you’re training for general fitness, you can follow a program that balances all the different muscle groups. If you’re training for a sport, you may benefit from emphasizing certain muscle groups frequently used in your sport.

Many people find it helpful to pair muscle groups that are close together. For instance, you may want to pair your shoulders and arms together since many exercises, such as rows, use both body parts.

The primary benefit of splitting different muscle groups onto different days is your ability to give each muscle more rest. For example, if you’re training on a weekly schedule and have one leg day per week, your legs have seven days to recover between sessions.

Examples for beginners
Here’s one example of how you could combine your muscle groups together using the six basic groups we listed above:

Day 1: chest and shoulders
Day 2: legs
Day 3: back, abdominals, and arms
If you’re only planning on lifting twice per week, a good way to structure your workouts may be:

Day 1: chest, arms, and shoulders
Day 2: legs, back and abdominals
If you’re a beginner, sticking to those six basic muscle groups is enough to build a great workout plan that can help you improve your fitness.

Example for advanced lifters
If you’ve already been lifting for a while, you may want to be more specific with the muscles you target when building your program.

Here’s an example of how you could combine muscle groups using the more detailed groups we outlined:

Day 1: chest, shoulders, triceps, forearms
Day 2: calves, hamstrings, quadriceps, glutes
Day 3: biceps, back, abdominals, traps, lats
You don’t necessarily need a separate exercise for each muscle group. For example, squatting uses your:

hamstrings
quadriceps
glutes
back
abdominals
Schedule for workouts
The American Heart AssociationTrusted Source recommends taking at least two days between lilting sessions to give your body time to recover. Many people find they like strength training three times a week.

Here’s an example of how you could structure your weekly schedule:

Monday: arms and shoulders
push-ups: 3 sets of 8 reps
biceps curls: 3 sets of 8 reps
shoulder press: 3 sets of 10 reps
bench dips: 2 sets of 12 reps
lateral raises: 3 sets of 10 reps
Wednesday: legs
barbell back squats: 3 sets of 8 reps
dumbbell lunges: 2 sets of 10 reps
Romanian deadlifts: 3 sets of 8 reps
step-ups: 2 sets of 12 reps
calve raises: 3 sets of 12 reps
Friday: back, chest, and abdominals
dumbbell bench press: 3 sets of 8 reps
dumbbell fly: 3 sets of 8-10 reps
bicycle crunches: 3 sets of 20 reps
one-arm dumbbell rows: 3 sets of 8 reps
dumbbell bent-over rows: 3 sets of 8 reps
crunches: 3 sets of 20 reps
Types of exercises
When you think of strength training, you may think you need dumbbells or barbells. However, resistance training comes in many forms such as:

resistance band exercises
medicine ball exercises
bodyweight exercises
free weights
machine exercises
If you want to include free weight training into your program, it’s a good idea to stick to a weight you can lift comfortably for 12 to 15 repetitions. As you get stronger, you can lower the number of reps and increase the weight.

Exercises that target certain muscles
Here’s an example of some exercises you can perform to target each muscle group.

Chest
Bench press: You can use a barbell or dumbbells. It’s a good idea to have a partner spot you in case you get stuck.
Push-ups: Increasing the width of your hands puts an emphasis on your chest muscles
Band chest press: Hook a band with handles behind you and push away from your body as if you’re passing a basketball.
Back
One-arm dumbbell row: Helps strengthen your upper back, shoulder, and upper arms.
Resistance band pull apart: Hold a resistance band with your hands shoulder-width apart. Focus on squeezing your shoulder blades together as you pull the band.
Superman: To make the exercise harder, you can hold a weight in your hands over your head.
Arms
Biceps curls: If you don’t have access to dumbbells, you can use soup cans or other heavy household objects.
Triceps dips:Works both your triceps and chest.
Pull-ups:Pull-ups work your upper back, shoulders, core, and arms.
Abdominal
Plank: Support yourself on your forearms and toes with your abdominals and core flexed.
Bicycle crunches: The twisting motion in this exercise helps target the muscles at the side of your core called your obliques.
Hanging leg raises: You can start with your knees at 90 degrees for an easier variation and progress to straight legs as the exercise becomes more difficult.
Legs
Squat:You can perform bodyweight squats, use dumbbells, or a barbell.
Lunges: There are many variations of the lunge including walking dumbbell lunges, reverse lunges, and barbell lunges.
Calf raises:You can start with your body weight and add weight as they become easier.
Shoulders
Seated shoulder press: It’s a good idea to have a partner help you get the weights into place to avoid injuring your shoulders.
Resistance band shoulder press: You can stand in the middle of a large resistance band with handles and push your hands toward the ceiling.
Plank with arms straight: This exercise helps work your core, shoulders, and back.
When to talk with a pro
Although some people enjoy the freedom of creating their own workout plans, you may also find that you’d rather work with a certified personal trainer or another fitness expert. A personal trainer can show you how to perform exercises with proper technique so you can safely do them on your own later.

Some people find hiring a personal trainer helps them stay motivated and makes working out more fun. A trainer can keep you accountable and make sure that you’re working at an appropriate intensity for your current fitness level.

The bottom line
There are many ways you can structure your weekly workout to get results. Many people find it helpful to separate their strength training workouts by muscle group to give their muscles more time to recover. It’s a good idea to give yourself a two-day break between strength training workouts to avoid overtraining.

If you don’t have access to a gym, there are plenty of great strength training exercises you can do at home using household items, resistance bands, or your body weight.

Before every strength training workout, it’s a good idea to take at least 10 minutes to warm up and concentrate on good technique.

Last medically reviewed on May 28, 2020

How we reviewed this article:

SOURCES

HISTORY
Our experts continually monitor the health and wellness space, and we update our articles when new information becomes available.

Current Version

Feb 24, 2023

Written By

Daniel Yetman

Edited By

Allison Tsai

May 28, 2020

Written By

Daniel Yetman

Edited By

Allison Tsai

Medically Reviewed By

Jake Tipane, CPT

Copy Edited By

Amy Whitley

Share this article

Medically reviewed by Jake Tipane, CPT — By Daniel Yetman — Updated on February 24, 2023







Was this article helpful?
Yes
No

What Muscles Do Bench Presses Work?
Muscles impacted
What it is
Variations
How to
Adding to your routine
FAQs
Takeaway
Bench presses can be an effective exercise for building up chest, arm, and shoulder muscles. They work several different muscles in your upper body, including the chest, shoulders, and arms.

A bench press is an exercise that can be used to strengthen the muscles of the upper body, including the pectorals, arms, and shoulders.

Depending on your goals, there are different variations of bench presses that work slightly different muscles, too. For example, a narrower grip bench press will put extra emphasis on the triceps and forearms.

Other benefits of adding bench presses to your weight-training regimen include increasing upper body strength, improving muscular endurance, and even preparing your upper body to do movements like pushups. They also can be an effective strengthening exercise for sports like sprinting, hockey, and football.

Muscles worked by a bench press
Bench presses work several different muscles in your upper body, including the chest, shoulders, and arms.

Although the muscles worked may vary slightly depending on the specific variation that you perform, bench presses can target the following muscles:

pectoralis major
anterior deltoid
triceps brachii
biceps brachii
serratus anterior
Read on to learn more about bench presses and how to get the most out of this exercise.

What is a bench press?
The bench press is a compound exercise that targets the muscles of the upper body.

It involves lying on a bench and pressing weight upward using either a barbell or a pair of dumbbells. During a bench press, you lower the weight down to chest level and then press upwards while extending your arms. This movement is considered one repetition, or rep.

There are several variations of bench presses that each work different muscles. These may involve lying flat, lying at an incline or decline, or placing your hands closer together on the barbell.

What effect do bench press variations have on the muscles?
Each bench press variation works slightly different muscle groups. According to a 2017 studyTrusted Source, variations include:

Traditional bench press. This exercise is done lying down on a flat bench and pressing a barbell up and down at chest height. It works the pectoral muscles, shoulders, and arms.
Incline bench press. For this variation, the bench should be angled upward between 45 and 60 degrees, so you are leaning back slightly. It targets muscles of the upper chest and shoulders.
Decline bench press. For this variation, the bench should be angled downward, so when you lie down your feet are in a higher position than your head. It works the lower chest muscles and shoulders.
Narrow grip bench press. During this variation, your hands are narrower together on the barbell. It works the triceps and forearms.
It’s not necessary to do all of these variations in the same workout. Overusing a muscle group can lead to injuries. That’s especially true if you’re working with heavy weights.

If you like variety, you can pick 2 or more variations per workout. Try to give yourself 1 or 2 rest days, allowing muscles to recover before switching between the other variations.


How to do a bench press
Traditional flat bench press
Equipment needed: barbell (additional weights optional) or dumbbells, flat bench

Lie on your back on a flat bench. Grip a barbell with hands slightly wider than shoulder width. The bar should be directly over the shoulders.
Press your feet firmly into the ground and keep your hips on the bench throughout the entire movement.
Keep your core engaged and maintain a neutral spine position throughout the movement. Avoid arching your back.
Slowly lift the bar or dumbbells off the rack, if using. Lower the bar to the chest, about nipple level, allowing elbows to bend out to the side, about 45 degrees away from the body.
Stop lowering when your elbows are just below the bench. Press feet into the floor as you push the bar back up to return to starting position.
Perform 5 to 10 reps, depending on weight used. Perform up to 3 sets.
Narrow grip bench press
Equipment needed: barbell (additional weights optional), flat bench

Use the steps above for a traditional bench press, but grip barbell with hands shoulder-width throughout the movement.

Incline bench press
Equipment needed: two dumbbells or barbell, incline bench angled between 45 and 60 degrees

Place feet flat on the floor as you lean back slightly, so your back rests against the bench with a neutral spine.
Start by holding dumbbells or a barbell directly over the shoulders. Face your palms forward, with the thumb wrapped around the handle.
Press the weight upward over your eyes or slightly higher, with elbows extended to 45 degrees.
Inhale and lower dumbbells or barbell slowly and with control until they touch or reach just above the chest, elbows and wrists staying out to the sides.
Repeat the press and perform around 5 reps or more. Keep in mind that reps depend on your goals and the weight. Someone using heavier weights may do fewer reps than someone using lighter weights.
Decline chest press
Equipment needed: bench angled down at 15 degreesTrusted Source and dumbbells or a barbell

Slowly lie down on the decline bench, so your legs are higher than your head, keeping your back firmly planted into the back of the bench. Place your feet in provided stirrups.
Have a spotter help you lift the bar off the rack or grip dumbbells, if using. Hold the weight directly over the shoulders, arms slightly wider than shoulder height.
Push the weight up until your arms are angled at 45 degrees at the top.
Slowly lower the weight back down to chest height, elbows out to the sides.
Repeat the press and perform around 5 reps or more. Keep in mind that reps depend on your goals and the weight. Someone using heavier weights may do fewer reps than someone using lighter weights.
Incorporating bench presses into your routine
If you want to add bench presses to your weightlifting routine, try to perform bench presses only 2 to 3 times per week. Give yourself at least 1 day between doing bench presses to allow your muscles to recover.

The number of reps you perform per session depends on your fitness goals. If you are using very heavy weight, doing just 3 to 5 reps at a time may be enough to be effective. You can perform up to 3 sets, resting a few minutes between sets. Number of sets is also dependent on goals. A lifter looking to improve strength may do 4 to 6 sets, while someone who wants to work on muscular endurance may do 2 to 3 sets.

For a full-body workout, spend another day focusing on legs and shoulders by doing squats, lunges, and overhead presses. Also, include cardiovascular exercises in your weekly routine, like running, swimming, or cycling.

Following this type of varied routine is important to make sure you’re working your entire body. This type of weekly routine also lets you take rest days to allow different muscles to recover.

Full-body routines can also be more effective than spot training, or always performing the same exercise to try to build up that muscle. Remember, your body quickly adapts to exercise, so it’s important to switch up your workouts to keep your body challenged.

Frequently asked questions
What is a bench press good for?
Bench presses can be used to increase strength, improve endurance, and tone the muscles of the upper body, including the chest, arms, and shoulders.

What’s more, some 2018 researchTrusted Source suggests that adding exercises like bench presses to your workout routine could offer other health benefits, including increased bone density.

What is the difference between a press and a bench press?
The term “press” can refer to any type of exercise that uses a pressing movement to increase strength and build muscle. This can include exercises like the leg press, chest press, floor press, or overhead press.

The overhead press, for example, is a common exercise that you can perform sitting or standing. It involves pressing a barbell or pair of dumbbells from your upper chest to overhead.

Meanwhile, the bench press is an exercise that targets the muscles in the upper body by pressing weight upward from the chest while lying on a bench.

While both target the upper body, each exercise affects specific muscles differently. For instance, a small 2020 studyTrusted Source showed that the overhead press activates the deltoids more, whereas the bench press focuses more on the chest.

How many days per week should I do bench press?
Some 2018 researchTrusted Source has found that training 1 to 3 times per week could help optimize strength gains.

However, the number of times that you should perform a bench press per week depends on your personal goals and fitness routine.

Some may prefer performing bench presses only once per week. Others may find that adding it to their routine more frequently, such as 3 to 4 times per week, works better for them.

For best results, be sure to perform bench presses on nonconsecutive days so that your muscles have a chance to fully recover.

How much should you bench press?
The amount of weight that you should bench press depends on several factors, including your fitness level, size and build, lifting experience, and goals.

You can use these charts to help you get a good idea of how much you can lift. Then, you can adjust the weight as needed to fit your fitness goals.

For example, if you’re focused on muscular endurance, you may want to decrease the amount of weight that you use and perform a higher number of reps. On the other hand, if you’re looking to build strength, performing fewer reps with more weight may be a better option.

Takeaway
Bench presses can be an effective exercise for building up chest, arm, and shoulder muscles. If you’re new to the bench press, work with a spotter. They can watch your form and make sure you’re lifting the correct weight for your fitness level.

If you aren’t sure how to add bench presses to an effective fitness routine, work with a certified personal trainer. They can create a routine based on your goals.