The basics of weight training
Building and maintaining muscle is necessary for all of us, especially as we age. And the earlier we start, the better.

According to the American Council on Exercise, most adults lose nearly a half pound of muscle per year starting around age 30, mostly because they aren’t as active as they were when they were younger. Losing muscle at the same time that metabolism starts to slow down is a recipe for weight gain and the health issues that can accompany it.

Building stronger muscles isn’t just about vanity, either. According to the Mayo Clinic, strength training not only helps with weight control, but also stops bone loss and can even build new bone.

This can reduce the risk of fractures from osteoporosis. It also improves balance and boosts energy levels.

A significant amount of evidence exists to support the overall health benefits of strength training. And there’s been some quite convincing research on the subject recently:

A study published in Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers and Preventionsuggested that the more muscle men have, the lower their risk of death from cancer.
A studyTrusted Source published in BMJsuggested that weight training can improve long-term balance in older adults.
A 2017 study in the Journal of EndocrinologyTrusted Source suggested that having muscle can improve insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance.
How much weight is best?
The amount of weight you use depends on how many repetitions you’re aiming for. You want to lift enough weight so that the last repetition is really tough and you feel like you couldn’t do one more. Naturally, you’ll need to use a heavier dumbbell for 6 repetitions than you will for 12, even though you’re doing the same exercise.

Never lift so much weight that it causes pain. You are better off lifting too little than too much as your body gets used to weight training. Also, unless you are working out with a spotter, use machines with safety stops in place to prevent injury.


Which exercises are best?
The best exercises depend on your goals and how much time you have. You can do one exercise per body part or you can do six. You can do exercises that focus on one muscle group or exercises that work several at the same time.

The key is balance. It doesn’t look too good to have a huge chest and a weak back, and it’s also not healthy. When you work on one muscle, make sure you also schedule time to work on the opposing muscle.

All muscles are broken into pairs consisting of an extensor muscle and a flexor muscle. These muscles complement each other and work in opposition to one another, flexing while the other is extending and vice versa. Some muscle pairs relevant to weight training are:

Muscles	Part of the body
Pectorals/latissimus dorsi	Chest/back
Anterior deltoids/posterior deltoids	Front of the shoulder/back of the shoulder
Trapezius/deltoids	Upper back/shoulder
Abdominus rectus/spinal erectors	Abdomen/lower back
Left and right external obliques	Left side of abdomen/right side of abdomen
Quadriceps/hamstrings	Front of thigh/back of thigh
Tibialis anterior/gastrocnemius	Shin/calf
Biceps/triceps	Top of upper arm/underside of upper arm
Beginner’s workout
Here’s a workout designed for novices. All it takes is at least two half-hour sessions each week.

For each of the following exercises:

Start with one set of 8 to 12 repetitions (reps) for the first four weeks. When choosing weight, remember that the last 2 or 3 reps should be very difficult.
Increase to 12 to 15 reps for the next four weeks.
When performing 15 reps becomes easy, add a second set of reps (doing the same number of reps per set) or use a heavier weight.
Be sure to take deep breaths while you are doing these exercises. Always exhale during the exertion part (the “lifting” phase) of the move.

Dumbbell chest fly (targets chest)
Lie on your back with support under your head, shoulders, and upper back.
Hold a dumbbell in each hand. (Start with 2- to 5-pound dumbbells.)
Push your arms straight up until your elbows are almost entirely extended, palms facing each other. The weights should be directly above your shoulders.
Inhale and slowly lower your arms out to the side, keeping your elbows slightly bent.
Continue to lower your arms until your elbows are slightly below your shoulders.
Pause, exhale, and slowly close your arms back to the starting position.
Dumbbell overhead triceps extension (targets triceps)
Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart.
Hold a dumbbell in each hand with your arms extended overhead. (Start with 2- to 5-pound dumbbells.)
Without moving your elbows, slowly lower the right dumbbell behind your neck, pause, and then lift it to the starting position.
Repeat with the left hand.
Dumbbell shoulder press (targets shoulders)
Sit on a chair with back support and put your feet flat on the floor.
Hold a dumbbell in each hand. (Start with 2- to 5-pound dumbbells.)
Bend your arms so the weights lightly rest on your shoulders, palms facing forward.
Push the weights up until your arms are straight, pause, and slowly return to the starting position.
Single-leg squat (targets buttocks, quadriceps, and calves)
Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart and your arms out to the side, raised to shoulder height.
Lift your right leg out in front of you and slowly squat down, stopping when you feel like you’re losing your balance. (If you need help balancing, brace yourself by placing one hand on a wall.)
Contract your leg and buttocks muscles to push yourself back to the starting position.
Complete reps, switch legs, and repeat.

Safe and effective strength training
People do the exact same routine in the exact same order for years. It can be comforting to master your program, but the problem is that your muscles adapt and get bored — and so will you.

Every six to eight weeks, tweak your workout. Change things like the number of sets and reps, rest periods, angles, sequence, and type of equipment. Also keep the following tips in mind for a safer and more effective workout.

Never skip a warm-up
It’s tempting to go straight from the locker room to the bench press, but you’ll be able to lift more if you warm up your muscles with five minutes of aerobic exercise. Also, go easy on your first set of each strength-training exercise.

Don’t let momentum do the work
When you lift weights too fast, you develop momentum, which can make the exercise too easy on your muscles. People are especially lax on the return phase of a lift: they’ll often hoist the dumbbells up slowly and then let them come crashing down.

To guard against that, take at least two seconds to lift, pause for a second or two at the top of the movement, and take a full two seconds to return the weight to the starting position.

Don’t hold your breath
People often forget to breathe when they lift. You need as much oxygen as possible when lifting. Holding your breath or taking breaths that are too shallow can increase your blood pressure and zap your energy. Breathe through your mouth rather than your nose.

For most exercises, exhale when you lift or press the weight and inhale when you lower it. For exercises that expand your chest cavity (such as upright or seated rows), it’s more natural to inhale as you lift and exhale as you release.

Mix it up
To keep making gains, you must vary your routine every six to eight weeks. For instance, increase the amount of weight you lift (increase by no more than 10 percent at a time), increase the number of repetitions, and reduce the rest time between sets.

How many repetitions are enough? You should be lifting enough weight that the last two or three repetitions are very challenging. For most people that’s in the 12- to 15-pound range.

With a good strength-training routine, you may see results in just a few short weeks. Keep up the effort, and more-defined muscles, better balance, and improved overall health will be the result.



A Beginner’s Guide to Weight Training
Getting started
Before you begin
Weight training exercises
Schedule
Safety tips
Bottom line
Some exercises, including bicep curls and squats, can support weight training at home or the gym. You can use free weights or your body weight with certain exercises to provide resistance.

Whether your goal is to build muscle mass or achieve a fitter, more toned body, lifting weights can help you get there.

Weight training, also known as resistance or strength training, builds lean, stronger muscles, strengthens your bones and joints, and can help keep your metabolism in a healthy state — meaning you’ll burn more calories even when you’re resting.

And the benefits of lifting weights aren’t just for young people. Weight training as we age can help fight the loss of muscle mass and mobility, as well as improve psychological well-being.

So even if you’ve never done any kind of weight training before — it’s never too late to start!

What’s more, you don’t even need to belong to a gym. You can simply use your body weight for many exercises or use free weights, resistance bands, or other home fitness equipment to get results.

This article will walk you through how to get started with weight training and provide suggested exercises and training advice for beginners.

What do you need to start weight training?
If you’ve never lifted weights before, consider starting out with the help of a certified personal trainer. They’ll be able to teach you the proper form for specific exercises and set up a strength training program tailored to your needs.

Many gyms or fitness centers offer introductory training sessions at little or no cost, or they have trainers available if you have questions. Additionally, there are many personal trainers who train clients online, through video platforms.

While most gyms have a combination of resistance machines and free weights, such as dumbbells and barbells, you can also get a comprehensive weight training workout at home with basic equipment.

Equipment options
You don’t necessarily need weights to build lean muscle mass and tone your body. As an example, for some strength training exercises, like pushups or lunges, you only need your body weight to provide resistance.

You can expand your at-home workout options with dumbbells. A beginner’s set of adjustable weight dumbbells starts at about $50, but the price increases as you add more weight.

Kettlebells, which are weighted balls with handles, are another popular option. Many kettlebell exercises work several muscle groups at once, which makes them effective for a full-body workout, especially if you’re short on time.

Resistance bands are also a helpful addition to your workout equipment. These color-coded elastic bands provide varying levels of resistance when pulled and stretched.

A set of resistance bands can be purchased for $10 to $60. Because they’re light and portable, you can take them with you when you travel.


What to know before you begin
Once you’re ready to get started with a weight training program, keep the following tips in mind.

Weight lifting tips for beginners
Warm up. Some aerobic activity, such as a 5-minute jog or brisk walk, will increase blood flow to your muscles and prime them for a good workout. Skipping rope or doing jumping jacks for a few minutes are also good warmup options.
Start with lighter weights. You want to start with a weight that you can lift 10 to 15 times with proper form. Begin with 1 or 2 sets of 10 to 15 repetitions, and slowly progress to 3 sets or more.
Gradually increase the weight. When you can easily do the recommended number of sets and reps, increase the weight by 5 to 10 percent. Check to make sure this is the right weight for you before doing a full workout.
Rest for at least 60 seconds in between sets. This helps prevent muscle fatigue, especially as you start out.
Limit your workout to no longer than 45 minutes. You can get the workout you need in this time frame. Longer sessions may not lead to better results and may increase your risk of burnout and muscle fatigue.
Gently stretch your muscles after your workout. Stretching can help boost your flexibility, ease muscle tension, and reduce your risk of injury.
Rest a day or two in between workouts. Resting gives your muscles time to recover and replenish energy stores before your next workout.

Exercises for beginners
You may be especially interested in building your biceps or toning your legs, but the best resistance training program works all the major muscle groups in your body.

In fact, overworking one muscle group at the expense of another could raise your risk of injury.

For a solid all-over workout, you may want to start off with the following exercises. Including these exercises in your weight lifting routine will work most of the large muscle groups in your body.

SETS AND REPS
Start off by doing 10 to 15 reps of each exercise. Aim for 1 to 2 sets to start. As you build strength, you can add extra sets, and also increase the weight.

What is a rep? A repetition (rep) is one complete exercise movement.
What is a set? A set is a certain number of reps. For instance, 10 to 15 reps make up 1 set.
Dumbbell single-arm rows
Targeted area: Your back and upper arm muscles.

How to do this exercise:

Place your left knee on the end of a sturdy bench and place your left hand palm-down on the bench for balance.
With your back parallel to the ground, reach down with your right hand and grab a dumbbell with your palm facing the bench.
Slowly bring the dumbbell up to your chest. Squeeze your back and shoulder muscles and slowly straighten your arm to the starting position.
Finish 1 set, then switch arms and do 1 set with your right knee and right hand on the bench.
Dumbbell shoulder press
Targeted area: Your shoulder muscles.

How to do this exercise:

Sit or stand with a dumbbell in each hand, your palms facing forward, and your elbows out to your side at 90-degree angles.
Without leaning back or arching your back, press the dumbbells up over your head until your arms are almost straight.
Slowly return them to the starting position.
Dumbbell chest press
Targeted area: Your chest muscles.

How to do this exercise:

Lie flat on a bench with a dumbbell in each hand and your palms facing forward.
Slowly press the dumbbells upward until your arms are directly over the shoulders. Be careful not to lock your elbows.
Slowly lower the dumbbells to the starting position. Your elbows should be a little lower than your shoulders.
Bicep curls
Targeted area: Your biceps (muscles in the front of your arms).

How to do this exercise:

Sit or stand with a dumbbell in each hand in front of you, your elbows at your sides, and your palms facing up.
Curl the dumbbells up toward your shoulders by bending your elbows but keeping them stationary at your sides.
Reverse the curl to the starting position.
Triceps extensions
Targeted area: Your triceps (muscles in the back of your arms).

How to do this exercise:

You can do this exercise sitting on a bench or standing with your feet about shoulder-width apart.
Place both your hands around the dumbbell handle.
Lift the dumbbell up over your head so that your arms are straight.
Keeping your elbows by your ears, bend them to a 90-degree angle, lowering the dumbbell behind your head.
Slowly straighten your arms so that the dumbbell is above your head again.
Resistance band pull apart
Targeted area: The muscles in your back, shoulders, and arms.

How to do this exercise:

Stand with your arms stretched out in front of you at chest height.
Hold a resistance band parallel to the ground and grasp it tightly with both hands.
Keeping your arms straight, pull the band toward your chest by moving your arms outward, away from your body. Use your mid-back to initiate this movement.
Keeping your spine straight, squeeze your shoulder blades together and “downward,” and then slowly return to the starting position.
Lunge
Targeted area: Your leg muscles, including your quadriceps, hamstrings, and calves, as well as your glutes (buttocks). If you include a dumbbell, you’ll work your biceps, too.

How to do this exercise:

Stand tall with your feet shoulder-width apart (a dumbbell in each hand for the more advanced).
Take a big step forward with your left leg so your heel touches down first.
Lower your body so your left thigh is parallel to the floor.
Pause for a second (curling the dumbbells up toward your chest and lowering them again to the starting position for the more advanced).
Push off your heel and return to the starting position.
Repeat, but lead with your right leg.
Squats
Targeted area: Your leg muscles, including your quadriceps, hamstrings, and calves.

How to do this exercise:

Squats can be done with or without weights.
Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart and slowly bend your knees, so your thighs are almost parallel to the floor.
Slowly rise to your starting position.
To add resistance, hold a dumbbell or kettlebell close to your chest with both hands.
Calf raises
Targeted area: Your calf muscles (back of your lower leg).

How to do this exercise:

Stand on the edge of a step with your feet parallel to each other.
Slowly raise your heels a few inches above the step and hold for a few seconds.
Slowly lower your heels below the edge of the step and hold for a few seconds. You should feel a stretch in your calves.
You can add resistance by holding a light dumbbell in each hand down by your sides.
ADVERTISEMENT
Relieve pain and stress so you can improve performance
Find a Theragun designed to fit your lifestyle. Choose from percussive massage options for relief and relaxation, made for the workout called life.

Plank
The plank works your entire body, but specifically targets your core. It also strengthens your arms, shoulders, back, glutes, and legs.

Start on all fours, with your hands below your shoulders and your knees below your hips.
Straighten your legs behind you, keeping your feet hip-width apart. Tighten your core.
Hold for 10 to 30 seconds.
As you get stronger, increase to holding it a minute or more
To make this exercise easier, place your knees on the floor.

Weight training schedule
If your goal is to mainly build strength, three weight training workouts a week will likely provide the results you need.

According to a 2019 studyTrusted Source, doing a weight training routine 3 times a week is as effective as more frequent workouts for strength building.

However, if you want to build up muscle mass, you’ll need to do more repetitions and more frequent workouts.

You can work all your muscle groups during a workout, doing 1 or 2 sets of each exercise to start, and working your way up to more sets or heavier weights as the exercises get easier.

Or, you can focus on certain muscle groups on specific days. For example:

Weekly weight training schedule
Monday: Chest, shoulders, triceps, and core

dumbbell chest press
dumbbell shoulder press
dumbbell triceps extension
plank
Wednesday: Back, biceps, and core

dumbbell single-arm rows
bicep curl
resistance band pull apart
plank
Friday: Legs and core

lunges
squats
calf raises
plank
Was this helpful?

As you become more comfortable with weight training, you can mix up the exercises you do for each muscle group. Be sure to add weight and more sets as you build up your strength.

Safety tips
It’s important to focus on safety when you start a weight training routine. Pay close attention to your body and resist the urge to push yourself too quickly.

To stay safe while weight training, remember to:

Wear proper clothing for weight lifting, like closed-toe shoes and weight lifting gloves if needed.
Perform each exercise slowly, paying attention to proper form.
Use a spotter to help you with heavier lifts, especially those that go above your head.
Stay hydrated throughout your workout.
Inhale before your lift and exhale during the lift. Never hold your breath when working out weights.
Stop your workout if you feel sharp or stabbing pain. If the pain doesn’t go away when you stop exercising, seek medical attention.
If you have a health condition, talk with your doctor about a weight training and exercise program that’s safe for you.

The bottom line
Weight training is also known as resistance or strength training. It involves moving parts of your body against some kind of resistance, like weights, resistance bands, weight machines, or even your own body weight.

Weight training is an excellent way to build muscle mass and make your muscles stronger. It can also keep your metabolism chugging, strengthen your bones and joints, improve your muscle tone, help you burn more calories, and keep you healthier as you age.

To make the most of your weight training routine, start with lighter weights until you master the proper form. Then increase the weight or resistance slowly to avoid injury. Be sure to work all your muscle groups for optimal strength and fitness.

How can I lose muscle mass?
To lose muscle mass, you must reduce your caloric intake and alter your workouts.

Consider these adjustments:

Diet. Consume fewer calories and eat a lower percentage of foods that are high in proteins and carbohydrates.
Weight training. If you’re continuing to train with weights, use lighter weights and reduce weight training frequency to no more than 2 times per week to maintain tone.
Cardio. Focus your workouts on long periods of cardiovascular exercise, known as marathon cardio, to burn calories.
How to lose muscle in your arms and legs
To build muscle in your arms and legs, you:

lift to failure
increase the number of reps
increase the speed of your lifting
reduce rest time between sets
eat a high calorie, high protein diet
Thus, to lose muscle in your arms and legs, do the opposite:

stop a few reps before failure
reduce the number of reps
rest for full recovery (2 to 3 minutes) between sets
You should also consider long periods of cardio such as:

running or jogging
swimming
biking
ADVERTISEMENT
Relieve pain and stress so you can improve performance
Find a Theragun designed to fit your lifestyle. Choose from percussive massage options for relief and relaxation, made for the workout called life.

Dieting to lose mass
To lose mass, consider a deficit diet — lowering the number of calories you eat in a day to below the number of calories you burn in a day.

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)Trusted Source, a healthy diet includes:

vegetables, fruit, whole grains, and fat-free or low fat dairy products
lean meats, fish, poultry, eggs, nuts, and beans
minimal added sugars, salt, cholesterol, saturated fats, and trans fats
An alternative (but not recommended) way to lose muscle mass
If you stop working out and eat a diet that gives you fewer calories than you burn, you will lose muscle mass. This is NOT recommended.

You will also lose strength and cardio fitness.

A 2013 studyTrusted Source indicated that it takes about 3 weeks for athletes to start to lose muscle strength if they stop working out.
A 2018 study indicated that when athletes majorly cut back their cardiovascular exercise schedule, their cardio fitness dropped significantly after 4 weeks.
Was this helpful?

Takeaway
You can reduce your muscle mass by basically doing the opposite of what you would do to increase muscle mass.

Whatever your reason for losing muscle mass on purpose, it’s important to do it safely.

Before setting a goal for your body and changing your exercise routine and diet, consult a doctor to make sure that you stay within limits that are appropriate for your age, sex, and physical condition.

Cardio vs Weights
Aerobic and anaerobic exercise
Types
Benefits
Improve health
Length of workout
Warming up
Cooling down
Bottom line
What type of workout is best for me?

Starting a new workout routine takes dedication, patience, and a little know-how. You also need to know what kinds of exercise best suit your goals.

Many health experts recommend a mix of aerobic and anaerobic exercise. Aerobic exercise includes activities like walking or biking. Anaerobic exercise includes strength training activities like weight lifting.

Knowing how these types of exercise affect your body can help you create a workout routine that’s just right for you.

What are aerobic and anaerobic exercise?
“Aerobic” means “needs oxygen.” Aerobic exercise uses a steady supply of oxygen during exercise, while burning both fat and carbohydrates for energy. It gets your heart rate up for longer periods of time. That’s why it’s commonly called “cardio.”

Weight lifting and similar strength training activities are examples of anaerobic exercise. Anaerobic exercise involves a short burst of intense movement, while only burning carbohydrates for energy. It does not require oxygen.


What counts as exercise?
Running, jogging, walking, cycling, swimming, and dancing are all examples of aerobic exercise. Most team sports, such as tennis, soccer, and basketball, are also good aerobic activities.

Anaerobic exercise includes strengthening activities and short, intense workouts. For example, you can lift free weights, use weight machines, or use resistance bands. You can even use your own body weight for resistance in activities such as push-ups, lunges, and crunches. Short sprints and plyometric exercises that last a short time are also anaerobic exercises.

What do these types of exercise do?
Aerobic exercise helps boost your overall fitness by conditioning your heart and lungs. Your heart is the most important muscle in your body, and it needs regular workouts to stay healthy. Regular aerobic exercise can also reduce your risk of many serious conditions, such as diabetes, heart disease, and stroke. It can support weight loss and weight management too.

Anaerobic strength training can increase your overall strength, tone your muscles, and boost your bone density. You can use it to strengthen all your major muscle groups, including your legs, hips, back, abdomen, chest, shoulders, and arms. It can also help you lose weight: you burn more calories through everyday activities when you have more muscle mass.


How can I use them to improve my health?
Use aerobic exercise to improve your overall fitness level and endurance. It supports your circulatory and respiratory systems and keeps your body running smoothly.

Use strength training exercise to strengthen specific parts of your body, such as your legs, abs, back, or arms. You can’t cut fat from specific body parts by targeting them with strength training. But you can increase your strength and muscle tone. Strength training is crucial to help minimize the loss of lean body mass seen with aging.

How long should my workout be?
When it comes to aerobic exercise, think FITT: frequency, intensity, type, and time. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)Trusted Source recommends getting the equivalent of 30 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic exercise a day, five days a week. Or 25 minutes of vigorous aerobic exercise, three days a week.

The CDCTrusted Source also recommends doing muscle-strengthening activities at least twice a week. A single set of 12 repetitions for each muscle group may be enough to maintain your strength. You can increase the number of sets to increase your muscle mass. It’s important to allow your body time to recover between workouts, by resting a day or two between strength training sessions.

What’s the point of warming up?
Warming up before exercise can help prevent injuries.

With aerobic exercise, warming up gradually increases your heart rate and body temperature. To warm up, the American Heart AssociationTrusted Source suggests doing your planned activity at a lower intensity for the first 5 to 10 minutes. For example, start by walking or jogging if you’re going for a run. Or bike around the block at a gentle pace before hitting a mountain-biking trail.

For strength training sessions, warm up by moving and stretching the areas you plan to target. For example, walk briskly for a few minutes to get your body moving. Then dynamically stretch your arms before bicep curls or your hamstrings before leg presses.

Why do I need to cool down?
Cooling down after an intense workout is crucial. It helps your heart rate and body temperature gradually return to normal. Stopping suddenly could make you feel ill or even pass out.

To cool down, consider walking for a few minutes until your heart rate has dropped to normal. Then take some time to stretch. Stretching can help prevent the buildup of lactic acid and may help reduce muscle stiffness and cramping after exercise.

Rehydrating is also an important part of cooling down, no matter what type of exercise you’ve done. Be sure to drink water before, during, and after your workout. You can also replenish your energy with healthy snacks that combine carbohydrates and protein.

Better together
Aerobic and anaerobic exercise both have their benefits. Including both aerobic and strength training activities in your regular workout routine will give you the best of both worlds.

Varying your workouts can help keep exercise interesting. It may help you reach your fitness goals a little faster. For example, try a mix of different aerobic activities, such as running, hiking, cycling, and dancing. Dedicate different strength training sessions to different muscle groups. This will give them time to recover between workouts.

Including a variety of aerobic and strength training activities in your routine may help you reach your fitness goals faster.

Upper body resistance or strength training has a long list of benefits. It helps you boost muscle strength and endurance in your arms, back, chest, and shoulders. It also helps you burn calories, reduce your risk of injury, and build stronger bones.

Resistance training, also known as strength training, is an essential component of any fitness routine, especially for your upper body. And, despite what some people may tell you, it won’t give you huge, oversized, bulging muscles.

In fact, regularly working out muscles in your arms, back, chest, and shoulders is vital to keeping your upper body strong and giving your muscles definition. If you’re a woman, the benefits of strength training extend far beyond toned, defined muscles.

According to Rebekah Miller, MS, CSCS, NASM-CPT, founder of Iron Fit Performance, building strength in your upper body not only makes daily tasks easier to perform, but it also helps to ward off osteoporosis and improves posture.

And the best part? You can perform resistance training exercises in the comfort of your own home. To help you get started on toning your upper body, we’ve rounded up some of the best exercises you can do anywhere, anytime, with just basic equipment.

Getting started
Strength training at home is pretty simple. The equipment you need includes:

an exercise mat
a few resistance bands of different strengths
two or three sets of dumbbells that are different weights
Warm up first
The easiest and most effective way to prepare your body for a workout is to warm up first by doing exercises that increase your circulation and target the muscles you’ll be working.

For an upper body workout, this could mean doing arm circles, windmills, arm swings, and spinal rotations. Also, performing light cardio movements such as walking or jogging in place can boost your heart rate and get your blood flowing.

According to the American Council on Exercise, it takes an average of 8 to 12 minutes to fully warm up.

Once you’ve warmed up, you can start focusing on specific exercises for your arms, back, chest, and shoulders.


Arm exercises
1. Dumbbell curls
Targets: biceps

Stand or sit with a dumbbell in each hand, arms at your side, feet shoulder-width apart.
Keep your elbows close to your torso and rotate the dumbbells so the palms of your hands are facing your body. This is your starting position.
Take a deep breath and when you exhale, curl the weights upward while contracting your biceps.
Pause at the top of the curl, then lower to the starting position.
Repeat 10 to 15 times. Perform 2 to 3 sets.
2. Triceps kickback
Targets: triceps

Stand with a dumbbell in each hand, palms facing in toward each other. Keep your knees slightly bent.
Keeping your spine straight, hinge forward at your waist so your torso is almost parallel to the floor. Engage your core.
Keep your head in line with your spine, upper arms close to your body, and your forearms bent forward.
As you exhale, hold your upper arms still while you straighten your elbows by pushing your forearms backward and engaging your triceps.
Pause then inhale and return to the starting position.
Repeat 10 to 15 times. Perform 2 to 3 sets.
3. Triceps dip
Targets: triceps and shoulders

Sit on a sturdy chair. Place your arms at your sides and your feet flat on the floor.
Place your palms facing down beside your hips and grip the front of the seat.
Move your body off the chair while gripping the seat. Knees should be slightly bent and your glutes should hover over the floor. Your arms should be fully extended, supporting your weight.
Inhale and lower your body until your elbows form a 90-degree angle.
Pause at the bottom, exhale, then push your body up to the starting position, squeezing your triceps at the top.
Repeat 10 to 15 times. Perform 2 to 3 sets.
3 HIIT Moves to Strengthen Arms
ADVERTISEMENT
Discover a Running Shoe Created for Speed and Comfort
Hoka’s Rincon 3 features a balanced cushion-to-weight ratio for comfort and performance. It’s available in men and women’s sizing and a variety of colors.

Back exercises
4. Resistance band pull apart
Targets: back, biceps, triceps, and shoulders

Stand with your arms out in front of you at chest height.
Hold a resistance band tightly between your hands so the band is parallel to the ground.
Keeping both arms straight, pull the band toward your chest by moving your arms outward. Initiate this motion from your mid-back.
Keep your spine straight as you squeeze your shoulder blades together. Pause briefly, then slowly return to the starting position.
Repeat 12 to 15 times. Perform 2 to 3 sets.
5. Two-arm dumbbell row
Targets: back, biceps, triceps, and shoulders

Grab a dumbbell in each hand and stand with your feet shoulder-width apart.
Bend your knees slightly and bring your torso forward by bending at the waist. Your arms should be extended with the dumbbells close to your knees. Keep your core engaged throughout the movement.
Keeping your upper body still, engage the muscles in your back, bend your arms, and pull the dumbbells up to your side. Aim for your ribcage.
Pause and squeeze at the top.
Slowly lower the weights to the starting position.
Repeat 10 to 12 times. Perform 2 to 3 sets.
6. Wall angels
Targets: back, neck, and shoulders

Stand with your butt, upper back, shoulders, and head pressed firmly against a wall. Your feet can be slightly away from the wall to help you position your body correctly. Keep your knees slightly bent.
Stretch your arms straight above your head with the backs of your hands against the wall. This is your starting position.
Squeeze the muscles of your mid-back as you slide your arms down toward your shoulders. Keep your body pressed firmly against the wall throughout the movement.
Slide your arms down the wall until they’re slightly lower than your shoulders. Briefly hold this position, then slide your arms back up to the starting position while still pressed against the wall.
Repeat 15 to 20 times. Do 2 to 3 sets.
Chest exercises
7. Chest press
Targets: chest, shoulders, triceps

Lie down on an exercise mat with knees bent and a light dumbbell in each hand. You can also do this exercise on a bench.
Extend elbows to a 90-degree position with the back of your arms resting on the floor. The dumbbells should be over your chest.
Take a deep breath and when you exhale, extend your arms up until the dumbbells almost touch.
Pause, then return to the starting position.
Repeat 10 to 15 times. Perform 2 to 3 sets.
8. Mountain climbers
Targets: chest, shoulders, arms, core, and back

Get in a plank or pushup position. Keep your hands under your shoulders, with your core and glutes engaged, hips in line with shoulders, feet hip-width apart.
Quickly bring your right knee in towards the chest. As you drive it back, pull the left knee in toward your chest.
Alternate back and forth between legs at a quick pace.
Repeat for 20 to 40 seconds. Perform 2 to 3 sets.
Shoulder exercises
9. Dumbbell front raise
Targets: shoulders, specifically the anterior deltoid muscles

Grasp a light dumbbell in each hand.
Position the dumbbells in front of your upper legs with your elbows straight or slightly bent.
Raise dumbbells forward and upward until upper arms are above horizontal.
Lower to the starting position.
Repeat 10 to 15 times. Perform 3 sets.
10. Deltoid raise
Targets: shoulders, biceps, and triceps

Stand with feet hip-width apart, knees slightly bent. Hold dumbbells along your body, palms facing your thighs.
Lean forward slightly at the waist and engage your core.
Lift your arms out to the side until they reach shoulder level and form a “T.”
Return to the starting position.
Repeat 10 to 15 times. Perform 2 to 3 sets.
Safety tips
Warm up and cool down. Warming up before doing any resistance workout not only gets your body ready for exercise, it also reduces your risk of injury. Spend at least 5 to 8 minutes engaging in some form of cardio or dynamic stretches. When you’ve finished your workout, take some time to cool down and stretch.
Focus on your form. When you first start a particular workout routine, Miller says your focus should be on your form or technique. Then, as you build confidence, endurance, and strength, you can begin to increase the weight or do more sets.
Engage your core. Each exercise listed above requires core strength to support your lower back. To stay safe, make sure you engage your abdominal muscles before executing any move and keep them engaged throughout the exercise.
Stop if you feel pain. Upper body exercises will challenge your muscles and may leave you slightly sore, but you shouldn’t feel pain. If you do, stop and assess the problem. If the discomfort is caused by improper form, consider working with a personal trainer. If your pain persists even after correcting your form, follow up with your doctor or physical therapist.
The bottom line
Upper body resistance or strength training has a long list of benefits. It helps you boost muscle strength and endurance in your arms, back, chest, and shoulders. It also helps you burn calories, reduce your risk of injury, and build stronger bones.

For best results, try to do an upper body workout a few times a week. Start slowly with fewer repetitions and sets, and gradually increase the intensity of your workout as you build up your strength.