Reading Time: 4 minutes 20 seconds
BY: ISSADATE: 2022-10-20Watching portion sizes is an important part of the weight loss process. Sure, you aren’t likely to exceed your recommended calorie intake and gain several pounds if you consume one too many portions of lettuce. But getting the right portion size of other types of food plays a huge role in weight loss success.One way to ensure that you’re eating the appropriate portion size is with measuring devices. This includes using measuring cups or a food scale when preparing your snack or meal. Another option is simply to use your hand. The great thing about using your hand to determine portion sizes is that it is always with you. If you’re eating out, for instance, you probably won’t have measuring devices available. Using your hand to get the right food portions enables you to enjoy your meal without eating too much.Even if you have a food scale and measuring cups handy, such as when eating at home, you don’t always want to use them. It’s like when calorie counting. Over time, this process can be cumbersome. If you have another option for keeping your food intake in check, you’re more likely to use it versus giving up on healthy eating altogether.Using your hand to measure food has another advantage. A bigger person typically needs a higher calorie intake. Since their hands are often bigger as well, they’re able to easily determine the right portion based on their increased body size. This same approach works for a smaller person who needs a smaller portion. Their smaller hand size provides the perfect solution.The part of the hand used to determine portion size varies based on the food group being consumed. Here is a basic guide:protein – the size of the palm equals one portioncarbohydrate (including starchy vegetables) – one cupped handful equals one portionnon starchy vegetables – one closed fist equals one portionfat – one thumb equals one portionIt’s important for clients to understand that there is a difference between a food portion and a food serving. When you look at a food’s nutrition facts, this data is based on precise measurements. For instance, 1 cup of brown long-grain rice contains 248 calories according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) database. Depending on the size of your hand, your portion could be slightly more or less. Although the difference may be minimal, when it comes to losing weight, every calorie counts. And these differences can add up over time if portion sizes are consistently higher than serving sizes.Keeping food intake in check involves more than just paying attention to the size of a portion of food. Here are a few tips to help your clients keep their portions under control:When you’re thirsty, it’s easy to overeat. Your body knows that it needs something. However, it may not recognize that it needs fluids versus food. Taking several sips of water before a meal can keep the body from misinterpreting thirst cues for hunger. Staying hydrated between meals might also reduce the need for snacks, filling up the stomach with beverages instead of food.Engage in some other activity while eating and one portion can easily turn into two (or more). This can be avoided by being present during meals and snacks. Any time your clients are eating, their focus should be on the food and nothing else. Encourage them to place their food on a plate and sit at the table every time they eat. Turning off the TV and setting down their phone is helpful as well.Like the point above, eating such things as popcorn, nuts, chips, or pretzels out of the box makes it too easy to lose track of how much you are eating. It's always best to put the appropriate amount on a plate, in a bowl or simply in your hand and put the rest away for another day.One cup of a healthy fat such as avocado doesn’t provide the same nutrition as the same portion of a less-healthy fat, like cake. Sticking primarily to healthy food options helps ensure that the client’s nutrition needs are met without adding extra calories and fat. Another example of making healthier food choices is that eating a piece of fruit is better than drinking a glass of fruit juice. A piece of fruit supplies fiber that is lacking in juice, helping clients stay fuller longer. Plus, some of the fruit’s nutrients can be lost when turning it into juice. Not to mention, juice often supplies more sugar and other nutrients that don’t always fit into a healthy diet.If clients are having a hard time sticking to their recommended portion sizes, eating a bigger portion of vegetables does less damage to their diet (and weight) than eating a larger portion of fat. Sure, vegetables may not be their first choice if they’re going to overdo it. But if they want to eat more food while still hitting their goals, veggies can help them enjoy both.If a client is having trouble getting the scale down when using their hand to determine portion size, small changes may be needed. When measuring starchy carbs, for instance, you might suggest that they use a little less than one cupped handful. This suggestion may also be helpful if they have larger hands for their body size.Most main courses at restaurants contain more than a single serving, and for many of us, that means eating it all anyway. There are two easy ways to prevent that from happening. For one, split the entrée with someone you are dining with. The other option is to ask for a box when the food is served and wrap up half the meal when it's brought to the table.If you want to provide clients with personalized nutrition advice, you can do this as a Certified Nutritionist. With this certification, you are able to offer customized meal planning in addition to crafting an effective exercise plan. This gives you another source of income while helping your clients develop yet another healthy habit.Featured CourseBy becoming an ISSA Nutritionist, you'll learn the foundations of how food fuels the body, plus step by step methods for implementing a healthy eating plan into clients' lifestyles.Receive $50 off your purchase today!Check out our most popular bundle:.css-1t7jfed{display:-webkit-inline-box;display:-webkit-inline-flex;display:-ms-inline-flexbox;display:inline-flex;-webkit-appearance:none;-moz-appearance:none;-ms-appearance:none;appearance:none;-webkit-align-items:center;-webkit-box-align:center;-ms-flex-align:center;align-items:center;-webkit-box-pack:center;-ms-flex-pack:center;-webkit-justify-content:center;justify-content:center;-webkit-user-select:none;-moz-user-select:none;-ms-user-select:none;user-select:none;position:relative;white-space:nowrap;vertical-align:middle;outline:2px solid transparent;outline-offset:2px;line-height:1.2;border-radius:var(--chakra-radii-md);font-weight:var(--chakra-fontWeights-semibold);transition-property:var(--chakra-transition-property-common);transition-duration:var(--chakra-transition-duration-normal);height:var(--chakra-sizes-10);min-width:var(--chakra-sizes-10);font-size:var(--chakra-fontSizes-md);-webkit-padding-start:var(--chakra-space-4);padding-inline-start:var(--chakra-space-4);-webkit-padding-end:var(--chakra-space-4);padding-inline-end:var(--chakra-space-4);background:var(--chakra-colors-primary-base);color:var(--chakra-colors-primary-text);}.css-1t7jfed:focus-visible,.css-1t7jfed[data-focus-visible]{box-shadow:var(--chakra-shadows-outline);}.css-1t7jfed:disabled,.css-1t7jfed[disabled],.css-1t7jfed[aria-disabled=true],.css-1t7jfed[data-disabled]{opacity:0.4;cursor:not-allowed;box-shadow:var(--chakra-shadows-none);}.css-1t7jfed:hover,.css-1t7jfed[data-hover]{background:var(--chakra-colors-primary-hover);}.css-1t7jfed:hover:disabled,.css-1t7jfed[data-hover]:disabled,.css-1t7jfed:hover[disabled],.css-1t7jfed[data-hover][disabled],.css-1t7jfed:hover[aria-disabled=true],.css-1t7jfed[data-hover][aria-disabled=true],.css-1t7jfed:hover[data-disabled],.css-1t7jfed[data-hover][data-disabled]{background:initial;}Learn MoreCheck out our most popular bundle:.css-1t7jfed{display:-webkit-inline-box;display:-webkit-inline-flex;display:-ms-inline-flexbox;display:inline-flex;-webkit-appearance:none;-moz-appearance:none;-ms-appearance:none;appearance:none;-webkit-align-items:center;-webkit-box-align:center;-ms-flex-align:center;align-items:center;-webkit-box-pack:center;-ms-flex-pack:center;-webkit-justify-content:center;justify-content:center;-webkit-user-select:none;-moz-user-select:none;-ms-user-select:none;user-select:none;position:relative;white-space:nowrap;vertical-align:middle;outline:2px solid transparent;outline-offset:2px;line-height:1.2;border-radius:var(--chakra-radii-md);font-weight:var(--chakra-fontWeights-semibold);transition-property:var(--chakra-transition-property-common);transition-duration:var(--chakra-transition-duration-normal);height:var(--chakra-sizes-10);min-width:var(--chakra-sizes-10);font-size:var(--chakra-fontSizes-md);-webkit-padding-start:var(--chakra-space-4);padding-inline-start:var(--chakra-space-4);-webkit-padding-end:var(--chakra-space-4);padding-inline-end:var(--chakra-space-4);background:var(--chakra-colors-primary-base);color:var(--chakra-colors-primary-text);}.css-1t7jfed:focus-visible,.css-1t7jfed[data-focus-visible]{box-shadow:var(--chakra-shadows-outline);}.css-1t7jfed:disabled,.css-1t7jfed[disabled],.css-1t7jfed[aria-disabled=true],.css-1t7jfed[data-disabled]{opacity:0.4;cursor:not-allowed;box-shadow:var(--chakra-shadows-none);}.css-1t7jfed:hover,.css-1t7jfed[data-hover]{background:var(--chakra-colors-primary-hover);}.css-1t7jfed:hover:disabled,.css-1t7jfed[data-hover]:disabled,.css-1t7jfed:hover[disabled],.css-1t7jfed[data-hover][disabled],.css-1t7jfed:hover[aria-disabled=true],.css-1t7jfed[data-hover][aria-disabled=true],.css-1t7jfed:hover[data-disabled],.css-1t7jfed[data-hover][data-disabled]{background:initial;}Learn More