
              A place for the pursuit of physical fitness goals.

Please see the r/Fitness Wiki and FAQ at https://thefitness.wiki for help with common questions.
            

    "Our goals can only be reached through a vehicle of a plan, in which we must fervently believe, and upon which we must vigorously act. There is no other route to success."-- Pablo Picasso
  
    r/Fitness is made up of great resources and people who know where to go. This is an attempt to pull it all into one. Our wiki and the routines page has been stagnant, relying on new ones being proposed, or people messaging the mods, and we're trynig to fix it.
  
    Do you know of a routine that you haven't seen get the success you think it deserves? Did you gain your greek-deity physique through a routine that people normally don't? Is there a program out there that's so easy a blind monkey could follow but you've never seen it recommended here
  
    Well then, this thread is for you.
  
    Post personal promotions/your own routine under the SELF-PROMOTION comment only.
  
    All replies to the top level comments must contain a link, or be in the SELF-PROMOTION section.
  
    No more than 10 routines per post.
  
    You must reply to one of the linked comments; Your routine either falls into one of these categories or doesn't belong here.
  
    Please help us keep this thread from being a spam dumping ground. Report any comments or users that are breaking the rules of the thread so we can keep things useful and tidy.
  
    CLICK HERE TO JUMP STRAIGHT TO THE SELF-PROMOTION COMMENT BELOW!If you have your "own" routine, or it's a philosophy that's worked for you that you didn't take from anywhere, post it here.
  
    This thread will be added to the Programs section of the wiki, as well as the Megathread section of the resources, so please check for your routine below and upvote it before adding your own comments.
  
    Resistance & Strength Training
  
    Barbell Programs
  
    Bodyweight Programs
  
    Dumbbell Programs
  
    General Aesthetics
  
    Conditioning & Cardio
  
    Running
  
    Swimming
  
    High Intensity Interval Training
  
    Circuit Training
  
    Military PT
  
    Flexibility & Mobility
  
    Warmup / Dynamic Stretching
  
    Static Stretching / Cooldown
  
    Other
  