Mindful eating is not a trendy new diet or simple lifestyle change that is guaranteed to help you shed your extra weight.
It’s not about molding your body into a more desirable shape or helping you increase your strength, and it’s not here to tell you what you should and shouldn’t eat.Although it can certainly help you get physically healthier, mindful eating is here to do just one thing: help you build a better relationship with food.Before you continue, we thought you might like to download our three Mindfulness Exercises for free. These science-based, comprehensive exercises will help you cultivate a sense of inner peace throughout your daily life, and will also give you the tools to enhance the mindfulness of your clients, students, or employees.According to researchers Celia Framson and colleagues, the creators of the Mindful Eating Questionnaire (more on that later), mindful eating can be defined as:“… a non-judgmental awareness of physical and emotional sensations associated with eating”.In other words, mindful eating is all about being aware of how we feel when we eat.To break it down even further, there are four characteristics of mindful eating; when you are eating mindfully, you are:If you’ve heard of intuitive eating, you might be wondering how this is different. There is a lot of overlap between mindful eating and intuitive eating, but they are two distinct methods.While both involve paying more attention to what and how we eat, intuitive eating is more of a response to unhealthy trends and fad diets, while mindful eating is more of a lifestyle change that accompanies greater overall mindfulness.According to the “Original Intuitive Eating Pro,” there are 10 principles to intuitive eating:These ten principles underpin the intuitive eating movement and define it as a method of eating that acts as a stark juxtaposition to the all-carb, no-carb, fasting, and carefully planned meal diets that circulate our social media feeds. The point is to get physically healthier while becoming psychologically healthier is a happy by-product.Mindful eating, on the other hand, is all about improving psychological health and your relationship with food, and any physical benefits gained are a welcome side effect of this process.Am I hungry?That’s the question Dr. Michelle May wants you to ask yourself. She’s seen people suffer from unhealthy relationships with food and overly restrictive diets, and she put together a framework for mindful eating that can help people rethink the way they eat.Dr. May coined the term “The Mindful Eating Cycle” and used it as the basis of her Am I Hungry? Mindful Eating Program (May, 2018).Here’s the full cycle:Let’s dive into this cycle and flesh out the questions that guide you at each step.Why do I eat?When do I eat?What do I eat?How do I eat?How much do I eat?Where do I invest the energy I consume?Asking yourself questions such as these can help you break any unhealthy eating cycles you have and replace them with a healthy mindful eating cycle. Instead of counting calories and worrying about what you eat, you can build a positive and enjoyable relationship with food, leading to a happier and healthier you.Eating mindfully is not just a fad or a pet project promoted by its enthusiastic creator. It has proven benefits ranging from the physical (e.g., pounds lost) to the psychological (e.g., reduced anxiety about eating).Here are a few of the ways mindful eating has been shown to be effective.The answer here is a resounding “yes!” Mindful eating is not only good for your mind, but it’s also good for your body too.Researchers have found a positive relationship between mindful eating and healthy eating. Trait mindfulness is associated with less impulsive eating, reduced calorie consumption, and healthier snack choices; further, results suggested that mindfulness is related to having a preference for healthier foods (Jordan, Wang, & Donatoni, 2014).Another study found that a mindfulness-based weight loss program led to greater mindfulness, cognitive restraint around eating, and significant decreases in weight, eating disinhibition, binge eating, depression, perceived stress, physical symptoms, and negative affect (Dalen, Smith, Shelley, Sloan, Leahigh, & Begay, 2010).An intervention focused on mindful eating at restaurants proved to be effective in helping women manage their weight; women who participated in the intervention lost weight, lowered their average daily caloric intake and fat intake, and enjoyed increased diet-related self-efficacy (i.e., felt more confident about their ability to lose weight; Timmerman & Brown, 2012).Mindful eating is also an effective way to help those suffering from eating disorders.A review of a mindfulness-based eating awareness training found that mindful eating can decrease the frequency of binge eating episodes, improve self-control when it comes to food, and reduce symptoms of depression in those with binge eating disorder (BED; Kristeller & Wolever, 2010).Another review of 14 separate studies confirmed these results, showing that mindfulness is effective in reducing binge eating and emotional eating (Katterman, Kleinman, Hood, Nackers, & Corsica, 2014).Finally, a mindful eating group used in conjunction with more traditional eating disorder treatment resulted in a reduction of disordered eating symptoms over a 10-week intervention (Hepworth, 2010).If these sound like the kinds of benefits you’d like to enjoy in your own life or share with your clients, there are some excellent exercises that can help you implement mindful eating. To start making mindful eating a habit in your daily routine, give one of these three exercises a try.Perhaps the most popular mindful eating exercise comes from mindfulness expert Jon Kabat Zinn. The “Raisin Meditation” can be found on the Greater Good Science Center’s website, but we’ll outline it here as well.Here’s how it works:Here is the raisin exercise and you can also browse the Greater Good Science Center’s other helpful exercises.Aside from the ubiquitous raisin meditation, there are other resources and worksheets that can help you guide yourself or your clients towards a healthier and more mindful relationship with your food.Three of the most popular and effective resources are described below:This useful handout comes from the Discover Mindful Eating book, a resource that’s chock-full of helpful tips and tricks.The Two-Plate Approach is a great method to use in places where you don’t necessarily have control over the portion size, or when it’s difficult to regulate your portions (think at a restaurant, especially a buffet).Here’s how it works:You can find this handout on page 9 of this slideshow presentation from Skelly Publishing.This worksheet is a great way to help kids practice mindful eating, but it’s appropriate for all ages.It opens with a quick reminder of how to eat mindfully: “When you practice mindful eating, think about how your food tastes, sounds, feels and smells.Next, it leaves room for you to dip your toes into mindful eating and write about the experience: “Practice mindful eating as you enjoy a piece of fruit. Write or draw your reflections below.”
You can then eat something else or keep the piece of fruit in mind as you answer the next set of questions on how the food (1) tasted, (2) looked, (3) smelled, (4) felt, and (5) sounded.Once you have given some thought to how each of your senses perceived the food you ate, the worksheet asks you to think about what you noticed when eating this food that you hadn’t noticed before.Finally, indulge your inner artist by drawing in the space provided at the bottom: “Draw a picture of the fruit and all the things (including people) that it needed to grow.”This worksheet will help you practice being more mindful about what you eat, how you eat it, and the incredible journey so much of our food takes from its origins to our fork.You can download the worksheet from Education.com.The Mindful Eating Plate is a great visual of how we can best focus our attention and effort when we engage in mindful eating. It comes from Dr. Susan Albers, an expert in mindful eating and author of some of the books we recommend further down this page.It divides a standard dinner plate into four sections:Plus, there is a glass next to the plate outlining the most important aspect of mindful eating:The Mindful Eating Questionnaire is a scale used to measure the extent to which the respondent practices mindfulness in their eating.It was created by researchers from the University of Washington, the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, the VA Puget Sound Healthcare organization, and the Department of Veterans Affairs’ Epidemiologic Research and Information Center, which ensured that a diverse set of voices contributed to its validity and applicability (Framson et al., 2009).The final version of the Mindful Eating Questionnaire (or MEQ for short) included 5 factors with a total of 28 items. These subscales and items include:This scale asks the respondent to choose one of the four following options for each item:The MEQ results in a score ranging from 28 (a 1 on every item) to 112 (a 4 on every item). A lower score indicates a greater tendency to eat with mindfulness, while a higher score suggests the respondent struggles to eat mindfully—or doesn’t know how to eat mindfully.This scale is available for academic and research and the PDF include the scale itself as well as a scoring sheet.The worksheet mentioned above is a great way to help kids learn how to practice mindful eating, but there are other tips and tricks to help teach your kids how to eat mindfully.Give these five tips a try:You can also try these proven techniques from Michigan State University researchers:With a simple web search, you can find many different mindful eating “challenges.” They all have a similar aim: to get you to make a significant change in your eating habits in a short period of time.If you’re interested in making mindful eating a part of your lifestyle, you might want to give one of these challenges a shot. Just remember that a lifestyle change is about more than just the first week or two—lasting change requires sustained effort over longer periods of time.One such mindful eating challenge is called the 5-day “Mindful Meal Challenge.” It was developed by Dr. Darya Rose, a neuroscientist, and promoter of mindful eating. It involves a simple commitment to eat mindfully once a day for five straight days. It’s free to join and includes daily videos and a supportive community to help you live up to your commitment.


  These detailed, science-based exercises will help you or your clients enjoy the benefits of mindfulness and create positive shifts in their mental, physical, and emotional health.By filling out your name and email address below.If a challenge seems a little too intense for you right now, you might benefit from applying some simple, proven strategies for implementing a more mindful eating habit.These 12 tips for mindful eating come from Dr. Carolyn Dunn, a dietician, and weight loss expert:These 10 tips can also help you build a more mindful eating habit:It can be difficult enough to implement these tips when you are in your normal routine, but it gets even tougher over the holidays. Here are four tips from Jill Suttie at the Greater Good Science Center at UC Berkeley to help you stay strong in your mindful eating practice:If you’re interested in getting trained or certified in teaching or coaching others to eat mindfully, there are several options available, including:If your smartphone is practically attached to your hand, you might benefit from an app that facilitates mindful eating and better decision-making around food.These 5 apps are all great options:Let’s explore other resources that could be helpful for a classroom, or just for you to learn more.If you’re a hands-on learner or if you want to have resources to share with your clients, check out these three charts and checklists that can help take mindful eating from “a good idea” to “part of my lifestyle.”1. Awareness ChecklistUse this checklist to ensure that you are mindful and aware when you sit down for your next meal.The checklist includes these six questions:This handy checklist gives you an easy way to make sure you are really hungry and that you are fully appreciating your meal. Here is the checklist in PDF form to download for your own use.2. The Hunger ScaleThe Hunger Scale goes from 1 to 10, describing every feeling between ravenous and totally stuffed. It can help to use this scale when you’re thinking about eating but not sure if you’re really hungry or not. Check out the ten levels below and keep them in mind when determining whether you should partake in a second round from the buffet or not.This scale comes from Eugenia Killoran at the Pritkin Longevity Center and Spa (n.d.):Here’s how to use it effectively: don’t wait until you’re at a 1 or 2 to start eating and don’t keep eating when you’re full; instead, start eating at 3 and stop eating at 6.3. Mindful Eating ChecklistJulia Dugas from Food Insight brings us this helpful checklist to master the practice of mindful eating (2017). It has three sections with checkboxes, tips, or space for reflection:Meals
SnacksRecapThis simple checklist guides you in practicing healthy eating habits and being fully aware of what—and how—you’re eating.These scripts and meditations can help you stay on track in your quest to eat more mindfully:Here are more meditations on mindful eating from the Center for Mindful Eating.If you’re a fan of mantras, these 16 mantras from the University of Massachusetts Center for Applied Nutrition (n.d.) are also great tools you can use to be more mindful with your food:If you want a quick introduction or refresher on mindful eating, or if you want to introduce your students, children, or clients to mindful eating, give these six videos a try:Those who can’t live without a podcast on their daily commute might want to give these podcasts on mindful eating a listen:For those looking for a deeper dive into mindful eating, these seven books might hit the spot:If you’re looking to put some of the principles you learned about mindful eating into practice, these workbooks can help you on your way:If you’re interested in learning more about mindful eating from an academic standpoint, there are a few key journal articles to put on your reading list:The path to healthy body and happy soul is based upon self-study, mindfulness, love and awareness. Understanding our relationship to eating cultivates a lot of insights and helps us start living our highest potential.Natasa Pantovic NuitMindful eating is a way to become reacquainted with the guidance of our internal nutritionist.Jan Chozen BaysEven if you can’t be totally mindful at every meal, if you can say a blessing, silently if necessary, or offer up a prayer for someone, something beyond yourself and your food, the prayer helps to transform eating into something that affects not only our hunger at that moment but the greater world.Mary DeTurris PoustTraining your mind to be in the present moment is the #1 key to making healthier choices.Susan AlbersWhen you bow, you should just bow; when you sit, you should just sit; when you eat, you should just eat.Shunryu SuzukiIf someone is thinking about something other than the good food on the table, such as his difficulties in the office or with friends, it means he is losing the present moment and the food. You can help by returning his attention to the meal.Thich Nhat HanhMindful eating replaces self-criticism with self-nurturing. It replaces shame with respect for your own inner wisdom.Jan Chozen BaysInstead of thinking of food as the enemy, allow yourself to enjoy the process of planning and preparing meals or going out to lunch with a friend. Stay in the present moment and understand that the purpose of food is nourishment.Susan AlbersShare this article:Very helpful article. I can now coach my weight loss and stress patients better.. ThksThis is an incredibly helpful article full of great resources.  I will now restart aiming to manage my eating with a greater level of understanding and more tools to help me.  Thank you very much.This is the most helpful resource I have found!It was very comprehensive and useful article. Thank you for sharing your knowledge with us.My dissertation chair and academic mentor is Dr. Gayle Timmerman. I am bringing your article to her next week. She will love it!
Thank you so much for this article, it’s very resourceful, as a mindful eating consultant I really appreciate the material.Very useful and informative article.Your email address will not be published. Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. 

Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT) is not your average therapy session; it’s like a toolbox filled with colorful tools to tame the unruliest of emotions and [...]How can we find a calm harbor within ourselves amid life’s storms? How can we develop our ability to remain composed and centered when faced [...]Since Jon Kabat-Zinn (1990) first published his seminal study of mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR), Full Catastrophe Living, training in mindfulness skills has become a popular [...]Quick LinksOur CommunityCompany detailsChamber of Commerce (KvK) Registration Number: 64733564Taxation (VAT) Number: NL855806813B01Contact
                      PositivePsychology.com                    
                      Gandhiplein 16                    
                                              6229 HN                                                                    Maastricht                                          
                      The Netherlands                    
                    info@positivepsychology.com                  Sign up and download tools	Join 550,000+ helping professionals who get free, science-based tools sent directly to their inbox. Plus, be the first to receive exclusive content & discounts.
          © 2023 PositivePsychology.com B.V.
                      Built with love in the Netherlands
                  Invest in your practice and professional development this holiday season with savings across our entire collection.
              Black Friday Sale - Up to 78%             