An official website of the United States government

            The .gov means it’s official.
            
            Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before
            sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal
            government site.
          
            The site is secure.
            
            The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the
            official website and that any information you provide is encrypted
            and transmitted securely.
          
      
      The field of psychoneuroimmunology has witnessed an explosion of empirical findings during the last two decades. Research has documented the mechanisms through which stressful emotions alter white blood cell function. Stress diminishes white blood cell response to viral infected cells and to cancer cells. Moreover, vaccination is less effective in those who are stressed and wounds heal less readily in those who are stressed. While stress decreases the activity of some white blood cells, stress does not compromise the function of all types of white blood cells. Indeed, some types of autoimmune disease, which involve particular subsets of white blood cells, are exacerbated by stress. The literature documents the efficacy of talk-therapy interventions in altering immune system parameters and enhancing the body's ability to combat disease. The literature also documents the impact of the chronic stress of poverty on immune system function.
    
  PubMed Disclaimer
NCBI Literature Resources
      MeSH
      PMC
      Bookshelf
      Disclaimer
    The PubMed wordmark and PubMed logo are registered trademarks of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). Unauthorized use of these marks is strictly prohibited.Connect with NLMNational Library of Medicine
                8600 Rockville Pike
                  Bethesda, MD 20894Web Policies
                FOIA
                HHS Vulnerability DisclosureHelp
                Accessibility
                Careers