Bulk up and gain muscle with the 60-day transformation plan for hard gainers
For some men putting on muscle can be a real slog, but rest assured, we’re here to help. If you want to pack on size, the first thing you need is a .css-16fs9zm{-webkit-text-decoration:underline;text-decoration:underline;text-decoration-thickness:0.125rem;text-decoration-color:#d2232e;text-underline-offset:0.25rem;color:inherit;-webkit-transition:all 0.3s ease-in-out;transition:all 0.3s ease-in-out;word-break:break-word;}.css-16fs9zm:hover{color:#000;text-decoration-color:border-link-body-hover;background-color:#F3B032;-webkit-transition:all 0.3s ease-in-out;transition:all 0.3s ease-in-out;}muscle-building plan and the second thing you need is to get yourself to the gym. We know, we know, for skinny guys and hard gainers the gym can be an intimidating place: all the grunting and groaning from men lifting two or three times as much as you can. But you need to be in the gym because balancing a set of dumbbells is a more advanced move than lifting a barbell.That’s why our 60-day muscle-building plan, which has been designed to specifically help ectomorphs (hard gainers who find it difficult to gain muscle mass as well as body fat), utilises lots of barbell exercises and compound movements, which force your muscle groups to grow and make it easier to overload your body as you grow stronger."To get stronger, you need to get bigger. And to get bigger, you need to get stronger," explains strength coach Greg Nuckols. "Training for one without the other doesn’t really make sense for most people.”In this routine, you’ll perform big-muscle movements, so squats, bench presses and deadlifts. You’ll do these exercises frequently and, by working multiple muscle groups with these compound lifts, you'll be making a hefty difference to your muscle mass. That being said, if you struggle to deadlift at the start of this plan don’t worry. You can start with no weight on the bar if you have to.Once you get comfortable with the weight and movement pattern, make yourself uncomfortable by adding extra weight. Do that and your hard gainer days will be over.Ready to get to work? In this plan, you'll be performing each pair of exercises as a superset. Do one set of the first exercise and follow it up with one set of the second exercise. Simple. Rest if noted and then repeat. Continue until you’ve completed all of the sets for each exercise in the pair.Once you've done your supersets, there is a devilish finisher to get through, but once you've done that you're done. Until the next session that is. Rest at least one day between workouts, and schedule a maximum of three training sessions per week. Oh, and get ready to gain.Follow set and rep prescriptions laid out below.Rest 1 minute between exercises. Rest 90 seconds after the superset is complete.3 sets of 5 reps 2 sets of AMRAP (as many reps as possible). If you can’t perform a chin-up, do a band-assisted version.  Rest for 90 to 120 seconds after the superset is complete.2 sets of 8 to 12 reps3 sets of 10 reps per arm. Hold a 2-second pause at the top of each rep. Rest 90 to 120 seconds after the superset is complete.3 sets of 12 to 15 repsCable Core Press 3 sets of 10 reps per sideRest 1 minute between each set.3 sets of 40-yard carries Rest 1 minute between exercises. Rest 90 seconds after the superset is complete.3 sets of 5 reps2 sets of AMRAP (as many reps as possible). Again, if you can’t perform a chin-up, do a band-assisted version. Rest 90 to 120 seconds after the superset is complete.3 sets of 8 reps3 sets of 8 to 10 reps   Rest 90 to 120 seconds after the superset is complete.3 sets of 12 to 15 reps3 sets of 5 to 6 reps. Hold a 1 to 2-second pause at the top of each rep. Rest 1 minute between each set.2 sets of 8 to 10 reps per leg Rest 90 seconds after the superset is complete. 3 sets of 5 reps2 sets of 8 reps per armRest 90 to 120 seconds after the superset is complete.3 sets of 8 to 10 reps3 sets of 10 reps 2 sets of 12 to 15 reps3 sets of 10 to 12 repsOnly rest when needed. Rest 90 to 120 seconds after the superset is complete. Rest 1 minute between each set.2 sets of 20 reps  Week 2: Add one set to both exercises in superset one for days 1 to 3.Week 3: Add one set to both exercises in superset one for days 1 to 3. Week 4: Add one set to both exercises in superset one for days 1 to 3.Week 5: Follow week one's rep and set protocol for superset one for days 1 to 3, but use a heavier load. Strive to use more weight every week from here on out.Week 6: Same as week 2.Week 7: Same as week 3.
Week 8: Same as week 4.“The first thing to do is to cut down on your cardio – especially running”, explains personal trainer James King. “This is because the body’s response to cardiovascular exercise is to maximise its strength to weight ratio and this process will cut the muscle mass you are trying so desperately to build.” If you’re going to do cardio make sure you take in extra carbohydrates and switch to explosive interval training rather than slow continuous training.In order for your body to remain in a constant anabolic state (building muscle) it has to have a constant supply of energy. Eat at regular intervals, typically 5-6 small meals throughout the day. If you feel hungry, chances are you catabolic (your body is breaking down muscle as a fuel source). “Building muscle is low on your body’s to-do list, explains King. “Only when more important functions have been met will your body start building muscle – and that is only if there is surplus energy.” Make sure there is – eat.“The more stress you put on your muscles the bigger the rewards”, says King. “It’s absolutely vital that every set is performed to failure and make sure you have someone to spot you, if not cheat the last few reps!” he adds. In addition, ensure that every week you are lifting heavier – even if this is the weight of a barbell collar, tiny incremental increases will ensure you get a growth response. Grit your teeth and go heavy.“A common mistake is to confuse intensity with quantity,” says King. In the world of bodybuilding, less can be more. Each muscle group requires no more than three sets of three exercises. These exercises should not be performed more than a maximum of twice a week at a high intensity. Any more than this and they will be unable to super-compensate (the process whereby muscles grow in size and strength), the result being limited gains in size and strength.It is a necessity to include the following compound exercises in any bodybuilding program: squats, deadlifts and bench presses. These huge movements engage large muscle groups allowing your body to move some serious weight. “It’s the stress from moving heavy weight that causes a surge of testosterone”, explains King, “and that’s what stimulates serious muscle growth.”Sometimes, when you're knee-deep in the mission of bulking up, it may not be about how many plates you're racking up on your barbell during leg day, but rather how you're stacking your plate at mealtimes. Below, we've got a tri of muscle-feeders that, owing to a higher calorie-to-volume ratio and ease of consumption, will help bolster your meals quicker than you can say 'mass gainer'. Higher in protein than other carbohydrate sources — rice, pasta and cereal, for example — oats have the power to deliver a one-two punch to your bulk-up plan. Not only this, but it'll help steady your sugar levels to curb cravings and, handily, oats blend easily into smoothies and require next to no effort to prep. During a study, researchers found that whole egg consumption sparked increased levels of protein fibre repair and recovery than eating egg whites. The process is key to building bigger and stronger muscles, and is theorised that eggs can elicit a greater protein synthesis response than simply eating protein alone. The yolk contains fats, including the omega-3 fatty acid DHA, vitamins, like vitamins A, D, E, and K, and minerals, like phosphorus and iron. High in magnesium, vitamin E and protein, almonds, in particular, can lower cholesterol and boost your lifespan, as well as adding valuable calories to your breakfast, lunch and dinner. Seriously — research published in the New England Journal of Medicine found that for every day of the week you eat a handful of nuts, you lower your mortality risk. .css-1lv755s{display:block;font-family:GraphikBold,GraphikBold-fallback,GraphikBold-robotoFallback,GraphikBold-localFallback,Helvetica,Arial,Sans-serif;font-weight:bold;margin-bottom:0;margin-top:0;-webkit-text-decoration:none;text-decoration:none;}@media (any-hover: hover){.css-1lv755s:hover{color:link-hover;}}@media(max-width: 48rem){.css-1lv755s{font-size:1.0625rem;line-height:1.2;margin-bottom:0.25rem;}}@media(min-width: 40.625rem){.css-1lv755s{font-size:1.3125rem;line-height:1.2;}}@media(min-width: 48rem){.css-1lv755s{font-size:1.375rem;line-height:1.2;margin-bottom:0.5rem;}}@media(min-width: 64rem){.css-1lv755s{font-size:1.25rem;line-height:1.3;}}Our 'Repeat and Beat' Method Guarantees SizeA Rucking Cardio Workout To Build Tactical FitnessA Functional Interval Session for BeginnersTake on Our 125-Rep Kettlebell Workout The Ultimate Bro-Down Barbell Bicep WorkoutChris Hemsworth's 15-minute Band WorkoutThis 5-Minute EMOM Workout Is a Total-Body BlowoutBuild True Strength with Dumbbell Density TrainingThe Ultimate Globo Gym Hyrox WorkoutArnold Schwarzenegger's 5-Move Dumbbell WorkoutThe Ultimate 4-Week Training Plan for 6-Pack AbsWhy You Only Need 5 Minutes to Build Big ArmsMen's Health, Part of the Hearst UK Wellbeing NetworkWe earn a commission for products purchased through some links in this article.©2023 Hearst UK is the trading name of the National Magazine Company Ltd, 30 Panton Street, Leicester Square, London, SW1Y 4AJ. Registered in England 112955. All rights reserved.