

Food Assistance and Food Systems Resources
You eat in a variety of places – your home, work, restaurants, maybe even your car. With planning, you can have healthy options in any of these places.Planning meals to prepare at home is a good way to improve your food choices. Planning can also help you avoid less healthy drive-through meals.
A good place to start is MyPlate Plan. This tool calculates daily food group targets based on your age, sex, height, weight, and physical activity level. You can also download My Food Diary [PDF-127KB] to track your meals.Once you’ve planned your meals, make a grocery list.  While shopping, choose healthier ingredients for the meals you will prepare at home. Here are some ideas:National Institutes of Health offers heart-healthy recipes with information about serving size, number of servings, calories, and other nutrients.MyPlate Kitchen provides recipes that can be searched by nutrition, food groups, cuisine, cooking equipment needed, and total cost. Users can log in to save recipes or cookbooks.When your meal is ready, pay attention to portion size. For example, avoid adding too much butter or salad dressing. Also, serving food on individual plates instead of putting serving dishes on the table may discourage second and third helpings.Over time, you will figure out short-cuts, and it will become easier to make healthy meals at home.Before you go out, check the restaurant menu online. Look for healthy choices ahead of time rather than choosing a meal at the restaurant.Many restaurants serve more food than one person needs at one meal. Consider splitting an entrée with a friend. Or ask for a “to-go” box and use it for half your meal as soon as a server brings food to the table.See this game-board style brochure [PDF-816KB].Stock up on nutritious snacks at home so you have a healthy option to grab on the go. You might also stock your office cabinet or car glove box with healthy, shelf-stable treats if you snack in these are places. Consider the following:To avoid consuming too much of your favorite snack, do not eat straight from the package. Instead, put the amount that you plan to eat into a bowl or container. Also, store less healthy foods out of sight, like on a high shelf or at the back of the freezer. Move the healthier food to the front at eye level.You’ll find it’s easier to make better choices when you have a good variety of nutritious foods available in the places where you eat.To receive email updates about this topic, enter your email address.