Heart disease refers to many different heart conditions, such as high blood pressure, coronary artery disease, arrhythmia, and heart failure. You can greatly reduce your risk for heart disease through lifestyle changes and, in some cases, medicine. In Idaho, heart disease is the leading cause of death.
Many risk factors contribute to heart disease including high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, tobacco use, and diabetes. In 2019, over 50,000 Idaho adults self-reported they have angina or heart disease. Of residents who reported angina or heart disease, 31% reported they have diabetes; 71% reported they have high blood pressure; and, 68% reported they have high cholesterol.Visit the CDC to learn more about preventing heart disease.In 2019, 410,000 (30.6%) Idaho adults reported their healthcare provider told them they have high blood pressure. Of these residents, 71% reported they are on a blood pressure medication.Idaho high blood pressure fact sheetIn 2019, about 336,000 (28.8%) Idaho adults reported their healthcare provider told them they have high cholesterol. Blood cholesterol is a waxy substance that plays an important part in helping your body work the way it should. Two types of cholesterol exist, low-density lipoprotein (LDL), otherwise known as "bad" cholesterol, and high-density lipoprotein (HDL), otherwise known as “good” cholesterol. Too much LDL cholesterol or not enough HDL cholesterol increases your risk of heart disease and stroke. Cholesterol can contribute to buildup of deposits on the walls of your blood vessels (arteries) – a condition known as atherosclerosis.Only your healthcare provider can diagnose high cholesterol. High cholesterol can contribute to coronary artery disease.The most common heart disease is coronary artery disease. Coronary artery disease occurs when there is buildup of plaque on the walls of your arteries. The buildup will cause your arteries to become too narrow or can cause a blockage. When arteries are blocked, it prevents blood flow to your body causing a heart attack or stroke.Most people are not aware they have coronary artery disease until they have a heart attack. However, chest pain, also known as angina, is the most common symptom of coronary artery disease.Work with your healthcare provider to find your risk of coronary artery disease by measuring your blood pressure, blood cholesterol, and blood sugar levels.A heart attack, also called a myocardial infarction, happens when the flow of oxygen-rich blood to a section of heart muscle suddenly becomes blocked resulting in that part of the heart muscle not getting enough blood. The more time that passes without treatment to restore blood flow, the greater the damage to the heart muscle.A heart attack is a time-sensitive emergency. Know the signs and symptoms. Every minute counts. Call 9-1-1 right away. Symptoms of a heart attack include:Serious heart conditions, including heart failure, coronary artery disease, congenital heart disease, cardiomyopathies, and pulmonary hypertension, may put people at higher risk for serious complications from COVID-19. Serious complications can lead to hospitalization, being put on a machine to help with breathing (ventilator), or death. Like other viral illnesses, COVID-19 can damage the respiratory system and make it harder for your heart to work. For people with heart failure and other serious heart conditions, this can lead to a worsening of COVID-19 symptoms. Visit the American Heart Association to learn more about heart disease and COVID-19.Visit the CDC Myocarditis and Pericarditis After mRNA COVID-19 Vaccination website to learn more.Stroke is a time-sensitive emergency. Know the signs and symptoms. Every minute counts. Call 9-1-1 right away.Idaho stroke fact sheetVisit the Idaho Stroke website for more information about stroke, rehabilitation, and recovery.