Just another iHealthSpot WP02 site
November 10, 2023Avoiding injury all your life may be impossible. Our bodies were designed to move, and physical demands that are placed upon it can lead to overuse injuries. Then there are accidents, which are not always avoidable. What you do when you are injured can affect how quickly you recover from an injury and how quickly you go back to your normal life. With proper injury rehabilitation, you allow your body to regain what it has lost. Injury rehabilitation refers to the process of gaining back function, strength, and mobility after an injury. It involves a comprehensive approach, containing targeted interventions and exercises prescribed by sports medicine doctors and physical therapists. Here is an outline of the essential steps for injury recovery as well as valuable insights into preventing future injuries. Immediately after an injury, your initial response can affect your recovery process. Take caution and avoid exacerbating the injury and limit use of the injured area.  The sooner you see a sports medicine doctor, the better. They will be able to diagnose your injury, prescribe the most effective treatment, and give you an idea of how long it should take you to recover. A critical part of injury recovery is the use of cold therapy, which means to icing the injury. The ice will help reduce swelling and jumpstart the healing process. After icing the injury, apply compression to the injury using a bandage. Ensure that the compression is not wrapped so tightly around the injury that it cuts off circulation. After you apply the bandage, elevate the injured area above heart level to help minimize swelling. Depending on the severity of your injury, you may need a brace or splint to immobilize the injured area and allow it to heal without disturbance. Braces are usually removable and used on milder injuries, while a splint is kept on and is commonly used for more serious injuries such as fractures, sprains, and dislocations. A healthcare professional has to fit you for these immobilization devices. Once the initial rest period is over, it’s time to start physical therapy. This step of the rehab process is all about active treatment, and it’s where you’ll start to see real progress. A physical therapist can create a personalized treatment plan that includes exercises and stretches designed to help you regain strength, flexibility, and range of motion. Their deep understanding of the human body will ensure optimal healing and progress. Injury rehabilitation may involve modalities such as heat or cold therapy, electrical stimulation, ultrasound, or manual therapy techniques like massage or joint mobilization. Physical therapists use these modalities to manage pain, reduce inflammation, and improve tissue healing. In addition to doing exercises at physical therapy, you’ll have to do exercises at home regularly. Strengthening exercises focus on specific muscle groups or areas that have been weakened by the injury. For example, if you have a knee injury, exercises may target the quadriceps, hamstrings, and calf muscles. Exercises to rebuild strength also involve gradually increasing the resistance or load placed on the muscles. This progression helps challenge the muscles, stimulate tissue repair, and promote strength gains over time. Resistance can be increased through the use of weights, resistance bands, and bodyweight exercises. Strengthening exercises also incorporate movements that help improve the joint’s range of motion. It’s important to perform exercises through a full, pain-free range of motion. Depending on the injury, exercises may also include balance and stabilization training. These exercises help improve proprioception, or the awareness of body position in space, and enhance joint stability, as well as reduce the risk of re-injury. Activities like single-leg exercises or using tools that mimic unstable surfaces are often recommended by physical therapists. During your rehabilitation process, you will be introduced to sport-specific movement patterns that improve your endurance, agility, and ability to perform athletic movements critical to your sport.  You will know that you have achieved an advanced stage of recovery if the pain has completely gone away, and you have regained strength and full range of motion in the injured area. If you play sports, you need to receive clearance from your doctor before returning to the game. Now that you have successfully recovered, focus on preventing injuries. Cultivate injury prevention habits such as proper warm up and cool down, taking adequate rest and recovery, and adopting the correct form and technique in your exercise and sport. Finding the right balance between injury recovery and exercise is essential. When you start physical therapy services, you are still in recovery. Therefore, adhere strictly to the guidance provided by your physical therapist or doctor regarding resuming daily activities, and you should make a recovery without any issues. Dr. Brian Wallace is our sports medicine physician at the Joint Replacement Institute, helping you achieve relief from pain and exceed your athletic goals.
 Don’t let the fear of injury prevent you from leading an active lifestyle. With Dr. Wallace’s highly individualized and targeted treatment approaches, you’ll receive top-notch sports injury treatment and rehabilitation services in our world-class facility in Naples. To schedule an appointment with a top sports doctor in Naples, call our office today at (239) 261-2663 or use our appointment request form.Filed Under: General We often hear from our patients about how the doctors and staff at the Joint Replacement Institute have helped them.See MoreKeep up with the latest developments in orthopedic care, as well as news about our practice and events we sponsor.Learn MoreOur patient education library features more than 200 award-winning articles with images, videos, and tons of helpful information.Learn More(239) 261-2663 (BONE) Fax: (239) 262-5633 (KNEE)Copyright © var dToday = new Date(); document.write(dToday.getFullYear()); The Joint Replacement Institute. All Rights Reserved.The Joint Replacement Institute in Naples, FL, offers Arthroscopy, Foot & Ankle Surgery, Hip Surgery, Knee Surgery, Robotic Surgery, Shoulder Surgery, and, Total Joint Replacement for a number of orthopedic conditions. In addition, we provide multiple on-site services and products.