Mindful eating stems from the broader philosophy of mindfulness, a widespread, centuries-old practice used in many religions. Mindfulness is an intentional focus on one’s thoughts, emotions, and physical sensations in the present moment. Mindfulness targets becoming more aware of, rather than reacting to, one’s situation and choices. Eating mindfully means that you are using all of your physical and emotional senses to experience and enjoy the food choices you make. This helps to increase gratitude for food, which can improve the overall eating experience. Mindful eating encourages one to make choices that will be satisfying and nourishing to the body. However, it discourages “judging” one’s eating behaviors as there are different types of eating experiences. As we become more aware of our eating habits, we may take steps towards behavior changes that will benefit ourselves and our environment.
Mindful eating focuses on your eating experiences, body-related sensations, and thoughts and feelings about food, with heightened awareness and without judgment. Attention is paid to the foods being chosen, internal and external physical cues, and your responses to those cues. [1] The goal is to promote a more enjoyable meal experience and understanding of the eating environment. Fung and colleagues described a mindful eating model that is guided by four aspects: what to eat, why we eat what we eat, how much to eat, and how to eat. [1]Mindful eating:The opposite of mindful eating, sometimes referred to as mindless or distracted eating, is associated with anxiety, overeating, and weight gain. [3] Examples of mindless eating are eating while driving, while working, or viewing a television or other screen (phone, tablet). [4] Although socializing with friends and family during a meal can enhance an eating experience, talking on the phone or taking a work call while eating can detract from it. In these scenarios, one is not fully focused on and enjoying the meal experience. Interest in mindful eating has grown as a strategy to eat with less distractions and to improve eating behaviors.Intervention studies have shown that mindfulness approaches can be an effective tool in the treatment of unfavorable behaviors such as emotional eating and binge eating that can lead to weight gain and obesity, although weight loss as an outcome measure is not always seen. [5-7] This may be due to differences in study design in which information on diet quality or weight loss may or may not be provided. Mindfulness addresses the shame and guilt associated with these behaviors by promoting a non-judgmental attitude. Mindfulness training develops the skills needed to be aware of and accept thoughts and emotions without judgment; it also distinguishes between emotional versus physical hunger cues. These skills can improve one’s ability to cope with the psychological distress that sometimes leads to binge eating. [6]Mindful eating is sometimes associated with a higher diet quality, such as choosing fruit instead of sweets as a snack, or opting for smaller serving sizes of calorie-dense foods. [1]It is important to note that currently there is no standard for what defines mindful eating behavior, and there is no one widely recognized standardized protocol for mindful eating. Research uses a variety of mindfulness scales and questionnaires. Study designs often vary as well, with some protocols including a weight reduction component or basic education on diet quality, while others do not. Additional research is needed to determine what behaviors constitute a mindful eating practice so that a more standardized approach can be used in future studies. [1] Standardized tools can help to determine the longer-term impact of mindful eating on health behaviors and disease risk and prevention, and determine which groups of people may most benefit from mindfulness strategies. [1]Mindfulness is a strategy used to address unfavorable eating behaviors in adults, and there is emerging interest in applying this method in adolescents and children due to the high prevalence of unhealthy food behaviors and obesity in younger ages. More than one-third of adolescents in the U.S. have overweight or obesity. Youth who have overweight/obesity are likely to experience weight-related stigma and bullying by their peers, which in turn can negatively affect eating behaviors and lead to eating disorders. [12] Studies have found that eating disorders are developing at younger ages, with an increased number of children younger than 12 years of age presenting for treatment. [12]Mindful eating is an approach to eating that can complement any eating pattern. Research has shown that mindful eating can lead to greater psychological wellbeing, increased pleasure when eating, and body satisfaction. Combining behavioral strategies such as mindfulness training with nutrition knowledge can lead to healthful food choices that reduce the risk of chronic diseases, promote more enjoyable meal experiences, and support a healthy body image. More research is needed to examine whether mindful eating is an effective strategy for weight management.In the meantime, individuals may consider incorporating any number of mindful eating strategies in their daily lives alongside other important measures to help stay healthy during COVID-19. For example:A note about eating disorders: The COVID-19 pandemic may raise unique challenges for individuals with experience of eating disorders. [17] In the U.S., the National Eating Disorders Association has reported a significant increase in calls and messages for help as compared to a year ago. As noted, mindful eating is not intended to replace traditional treatments for severe clinical conditions such as eating disorders. If you or someone you know is struggling with an eating disorder, you can call the National Eating Disorders Association Helpline at 1-800-931-2237, or text “NEDA” to 741-741.A note about food insecurity: Many individuals may be facing food shortages because of unemployment or other issues related to the pandemic. If you (or someone you know) are struggling to access enough food to keep yourself or your family healthy, there are several options to help. Learn more about navigating supplemental food resources.Last reviewed September 2020The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.Use healthy oils (like olive and canola oil) for cooking, on salad, and at the table. Limit butter. Avoid trans fat.Drink water, tea, or coffee (with little or no sugar). Limit milk/dairy (1-2 servings/day) and juice (1 small glass/day). Avoid sugary drinks.The more veggies — and the greater the variety — the better. Potatoes and French fries don’t count.Eat plenty of fruits of all colorsChoose fish, poultry, beans, and nuts; limit red meat and cheese; avoid bacon, cold cuts, and other processed meats.Eat a variety of whole grains (like whole-wheat bread, whole-grain pasta, and brown rice). Limit refined grains (like white rice and white bread).Incorporate physical activity into your daily routine.Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
Make a giftA monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier. Sign up here.Explore the downloadable guide with tips and strategies for healthy eating and healthy living.