
Certified athletic trainer and performance enhancement specialist Duane Mueller shares tips to strengthen some of the most important but easily forgotten muscles.It is easy to fall into a pattern with your exercise routine, but does it leave out certain muscle groups? Many of us tend to focus on the major muscles, such as the quadriceps or the biceps, but neglect supporting muscles. Have you ever heard of your multifidus? How about your psoas? Strengthening these muscles is important for movement, coordination and balance whether you’re an athlete or not. And, they can help you prevent potential injuries.Duane Mueller, a certified athletic trainer and performance enhancement specialist, at the Froedtert & MCW Sports Medicine Center shares tips to strengthen some of the most important, but easily forgotten muscles. “Consider whether your training program balances anterior and posterior chain movement,” Mueller said. “If your training is overly dominant in one plane, you put yourself at risk for injury.”The rhomboid major and rhomboid minor muscles are in the upper back, between the shoulder blades. They connect to the scapula and the spinal column and help pull the shoulder blades together. Rhomboid strength is used for any overhead movement or throwing motion. If the rhomboids are weak or injured, a person might experience chronic back pain.“If you strengthen your shoulders and pectoral muscles but you don’t balance that by strengthening your rhomboids, you risk impingement in your shoulder,” Mueller said. The multifidus is a muscle that extends the length of the spinal column and helps to stabilizes joints in the spine. “Research shows that multifidus atrophy is common in people with deep low back pain,” Mueller said. “Activating your multifidus is one of the most important things you can do to maintain a healthy back.” The serratus anterior is a muscle group in your middle back, on top of the upper ribs. These muscles are activated when you inhale. They draw the shoulders blades away from each other. They are also responsible for the rotation of the arms. Restriction in the serratus anterior can lead to shoulder pain, neck pain and back problems.“If you spend a lot of time sitting at a desk with bad posture that can lead to a weak serratus anterior,” said Mueller.Most of us focus on training our gluteus maximus, which is responsible for a lifted, toned look in the buttocks. The gluteus medius is a muscle on the lateral side of your glute near your hip. If it is weak, it can affect hip, knee and low-back function. If you squat and your knees turn inward, you may have a weak gluteus medius.“Often, we see runners with weak gluteus medius muscles,” Mueller said. “They train by moving their bodies forward, in one plan of motion, often neglecting lateral and rotational strengthening.”The psoas major muscle is commonly considered the hip flexor muscle. It connects your torso to your legs and is the deepest muscle in your core. The strength of your psoas will impact your posture as well as the stability of your spine.“The psoas lifts your thighs toward your torso,” Mueller said. “It plays an important role in walking, running or climbing stairs. A tight psoas can reduce the length of your stride.” Learn more about how to improve athletic performance and prevent common injuriesNX Level Sports Performance Training Excellent info and exercises provided.9200 W. Wisconsin Ave.
Milwaukee, WI 53226414-777-7700Download the Froedtert & MCW app:    The Froedtert & the Medical College of Wisconsin health network is a partnership between Froedtert Health and the Medical College of Wisconsin supporting a shared mission of patient care, innovation, medical research and education. Our health network operates eastern Wisconsin's only academic medical center and adult Level I Trauma Center at Froedtert Hospital, Milwaukee, an internationally recognized training and research center engaged in thousands of clinical trials and studies.ATTENTION: If you speak another language, assistance services, free of charge, are available to you. Call: 414-805-3000 (TTY: 1-800-947-3529)We use cookies to understand how you use our site and to improve your experience. By continuing to use our site, you accept the use of cookies. To learn more, including how to disable cookies, visit our Privacy Policy.This site is not optimized for Internet ExplorerFor the best web experience please use an alternate web browser such as Chrome, Edge, Firefox or Safari.Click anywhere to dismiss.