By Amy Marturana Winderl, C.P.T.
Anyone who spends a lot of time sitting knows how easy it is to end up in a hunched-over position without thinking about it. Incorporating some posture exercises into your fitness routine will help you sit and stand taller in your everyday life, which you’ll want to do to avoid the aches and pains that can come with sitting or standing with poor posture for an extended period of time.As SELF has previously reported, posture refers to your body’s alignment at any given moment. There are two types of posture: static posture, which refers to how your body is positioned while sitting, standing, or sleeping; and dynamic posture, which describes your body’s position in motion. “Good” posture keeps your joints, and soft tissues like muscles and tendons, aligned in a neutral position—one that feels natural and comfortable and not like you’re stretching or straining or pulling on anything. Whether you’re seated or standing, your pelvis plays a major role in your posture, Phillip Higgins, DPT, a physical therapist who works with older adults at Bespoke Treatments in Seattle, tells SELF. “Your spine is a column, so if you manipulate one portion, it’s going to impact how the other parts behave,” he explains. “Finding a solid pelvic-neutral position will help the rest of your body.”To do that while seated, first sit in a chair, feet flat on the floor. Sit up tall and engage your abdominal muscles. (Here’s exactly how to activate your core if you’re not sure.) Tuck your pelvis under a tad, engaging your glutes a little as you do, so that your low back isn’t arched uncomfortably. You might naturally have a slight arch, and that’s okay as long as it feels comfortable. You want to make sure you’re not putting all your weight into your low back—sitting up and engaging the core will help with that.Then focus on your shoulders. “You want a nice relaxed shoulder retraction,” Dr. Higgins says. That means keeping the shoulders relaxed so that your shoulder blades are in place comfortably in the mid-back. That doesn’t mean you need to squeeze them, Dr. Higgins adds, and you should be able to breathe freely.Once your pelvis and back are in the right position, you should be able to rest your head right on top in a way that feels comfortable, Dr. Higgins says.“Standing is somewhat similar,” he says. “Your feet are planted, and you first need to control that pelvis. Don’t lock out the knees—you want a soft knee, a controlled pelvis, and a relaxed and retracted spine.”When you have bad posture, you end up putting extra stress on your joints and muscles. As SELF has previously reported, over time bad posture can lead to widespread body pain, particularly in your neck, back, knees, and hips. Bad posture also can throw off your balance, and in some cases, poor body alignment can even cause breathing problems, according to the National Institutes of Health.Poor posture can also result in tightness that can limit your ability to do everyday tasks, like reaching behind your back to wash it in the shower, Dr. Higgins says. By maintaining good posture, you'll ultimately be able to move better.When it comes to incorporating posture exercises into your fitness routine, Dr. Higgins recommends first focusing on your core strength, which is what gives you good control of your pelvis, and then moving up to exercises that strengthen the upper back.“If you can’t control the pelvis, the upper back stuff won’t matter,” Dr. Higgins says. “They impact each other.” Also, he says, people can arch through their lower spines to have “good posture,” or at least what looks like it from the shoulders up. But compromising your low back for seemingly good posture isn’t doing you any favors.Dr. Higgins recommends the below exercises for improving posture.You can string them all together as a posture-focused workout: Do 12 to 15 reps of each exercise and repeat for 2 to 3 sets. Doing them in order will help you progress from simple pelvis control work all the way up to back-strength work.You can also choose a few to add to your regular workout if you don’t have time for a full separate workout. The bodyweight-only moves on this list are great additions to any dynamic warm-up or cool-down, too.Demoing the moves below are Rachel Denis (GIFs 1, 3, and 8), a powerlifter who competes with USA Powerlifting and holds multiple New York State powerlifting records; Cookie Janee (GIF 2), a background investigator and security forces specialist in the Air Force Reserve; Grace Pulliam (GIFs 4 & 6), an aerial yoga and vinyasa yoga teacher in New York City; Morit Summers (GIF 5), a Brooklyn-based trainer and the owner of body-positive gym, Form Fitness Brooklyn; and Tiana Jones (GIF 7), a dance and fitness instructor based in New York City.Doing exercises in a supine position—lying on your back—is the easiest way to get control of the pelvis, Dr. Higgins says. This supine marching exercise builds strength in the abdominals, hip flexors, and stabilizing muscles of the back. Make sure to keep your low back connected to the floor the entire time; if it starts to pop off, don’t lower your feet as far.Dead bug is a progression of supine marching that adds in arm movement and a coordination challenge. It also works the entire core, including the transverse abdominis (deep abdominal muscle), the erector spinae (deep stabilizing muscles of the spine), and the glutes. This move loops in hip and shoulder mobility too.By Amy Marturana Winderl, C.P.T.By Malia GriggsBy Jessica KasparianBird dog is another core and pelvis stability exercise that works the deep muscles in the abdominals and low back and the glutes in a slightly more challenging way than dead bug.Exercises in the kneeling position, like this kneeling glute hinge, introduce the challenge of working the core against the force of gravity on the spine, Dr. Higgins says. This hinge not only teaches you to properly align the pelvis, it also teaches you to do a hip hinge, a foundational movement that you need to properly do squats and deadlifts.By Amy Marturana Winderl, C.P.T.By Malia GriggsBy Jessica KasparianThe dumbbell halo is a sneaky core workout, and maintaining a flat back and hips aligned while moving the weight is a great way to work on pelvis stability. It’s also anti-rotation work for the mid-back, which helps train stability because your spine has to engage to work against the urge to twist.The farmer carry works your grip strength (which you need for big strength moves like deadlifts and pull-ups), as well as your core and shoulder stability. It trains you to maintain an upright posture as you move and carry weight.By Amy Marturana Winderl, C.P.T.By Malia GriggsBy Jessica KasparianThe high knees march is a core and hip flexor exercise that trains you to control the pelvis when you’re walking. Keep your entire core engaged as you drive each knee up toward your hands.The bent-over row is a pulling exercise that targets important postural muscles in your upper body, including the rhomboids (small muscles located between the shoulder blades), trapezius (a diamond-shaped muscle that runs from the neck down the mid-back and spans from shoulder to shoulder), and the lats. It also works the shoulders and biceps, which help you perform the pulling motion.Related:SELF does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Any information published on this website or by this brand is not intended as a substitute for medical advice, and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional.More from SelfContact© 2023 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement and Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement and Your California Privacy Rights. SELF may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices