Let’s admit it – we love our daily hustles because they keep us going, motivated, and productive. However, as we become too preoccupied with our daily activities, we stop considering our posture. 
It is not until the pain sets in that we realize its importance to our overall well-being. But even worse, we would still keep going regardless of how uncomfortable we already are. Neglected, poor posture can cause several physical, mental, and emotional health problems. And so, while it is still early, we must learn to correct how we carry ourselves and, most importantly, make physical therapy posture exercises part of our daily routines.Posture is how we position our bodies when sitting, standing, or lying down. We may experience poor posture when we feel pain and discomfort while maintaining a particular body position. It can be caused either by our body being asymmetrical or by holding our body incorrectly. The effects of poor posture can include back pain, headaches, spinal impairment, joint degeneration, rounded shoulders, fatty stomachs, fatigue, and so forth. All of these can be treated and prevented.You can improve your posture by doing home physical therapy exercises to increase muscle strength and flexibility. However, these exercises will not always correct the underlying causes of your postural issues, especially if you’re not a professional. If you’ve tried everything and nothing is helping, consider physical therapy. Regular exercises are a great start, but physical therapy can provide much more than exercises. A physical therapy treatment program uses exercises and stretches to improve our posture. A licensed physical therapist can help you improve your posture by strengthening weak muscles that cause slouching and misalignment.Your therapist will create an individualized treatment plan that focuses on correcting any posture problems or painful conditions you have. The following are some exercises that the physical therapist may recommend:Physical therapists are the best people to help you with stretching and strengthening exercises because they are specially trained and understand how the human body moves. With their specialized education, physical therapists can help create a personalized treatment plan for your specific needs and problems. Make an appointment with a physical therapist in your area today to help you find the best pain relief treatment method for you! Thoracic Extension helps to lengthen and strengthen the muscles in your upper back. It also improves your range of motion. Follow these simple steps to get started:The seated row is performed on a weight machine to strengthen the upper back muscles. Specifically, the seated row targets the upper back muscles, strengthens your shoulders, and improves your posture.  Follow these simple steps to get started:Forward lunges are a fundamental lower-body exercise for lengthening the muscles in your hips and thighs and improving your balance and coordination. Once you’ve mastered the move, you can use it to build strength and muscle using nothing but your bodyweight or a pair of dumbbells for an added challenge. Follow these simple steps to get started:The superman exercise is an efficient and effective exercise that targets the lower back, glutes, hamstrings, and abdominal muscles. It complements exercises such as leg raises and sit-ups that primarily target the abdominal muscles in the front of the body. Follow these simple steps to get started:Scapular retractions are exercises where you pull your shoulder blades together toward your spine. It helps improve your posture, which can help with various issues such as back and shoulder pain.  Follow these simple steps to get started:The cat and cow pose opens the chest and lungs and stretches the lower back, hips, and core muscles. It makes you more flexible, takes stress off your upper back and neck, and strengthens your spine. Follow these simple steps to get started:Poor lifestyle can also cause poor posture. For instance, hunching over laptops and cellphones strains the spine, resulting in back and neck pain, fatigue, and muscle strain. But you can practice good posture any time, whether lying in bed, standing at the grocery store, or sitting at your desk. Keeping your spine aligned is also an important reason.You can do the following good practices in the comfort of your home, room, or office. Follow these simple tips:No matter how busy our daily lives could get, that doesn’t mean we should ignore our physical health. Having good posture is more than just looking good; it helps you to develop strength, flexibility, and balance in your body. Posture can be improved or corrected with physical therapy in Haverford before it worsens. It can also be improved by regularly performing simple stretching exercises in the comfort of your own home or office. So, let’s make it a part of our routine to carry ourselves properly because its benefits can be life-changing.Thanks for reading!

Physical Therapy Treatments

Laser Therapy

Golf Swing Analysis
Copyright © 2023 Primal Physical Therapy |  Website Design & SEO by Elevated Audience |  Sitemap(267) 354-0133905 W Lancaster Ave, Bryn Mawr, PA 19010[email protected]BFR TherapyDry NeedlingGolf Swing AnalysisLaser TherapyMovement AnalysisSports RehabAbout UsSchedule An AppointmentTrusted Resources© 2023 Primal Physical Therapy. All Rights Reserved. | Website Design & SEO by Elevated Audience | Sitemap