You may be able to fix or correct your posture over time with a combination of yoga, stretching, and exercises designed to stretch and lengthen the spine. 
Having good posture is about more than looks. It helps you to develop strength, flexibility, and balance in your body. These can all lead to less muscle pain and more energy throughout the day. Proper posture can also reduce stress on your muscles and ligaments, which can reduce your risk of injury.There may even be mental health benefits. A 2017 study suggests that upright posture can help increase positive affect, decrease negative self-focus, and reduce fatigue in people with mild-to-moderate depression. A 2018 study found that adopting an expansive posture may also improve body-related emotions, including body image satisfaction and self-appraisal.Ready to get started? Read on to learn how to do 12 exercises that’ll help you sit a little taller.Child’s pose stretches and lengthens your spine, glutes, and hamstrings. It may also release tension in your lower back and neck.To do this pose:This standing stretch releases tension in your spine, glutes, and hamstrings. It also stretches your hips and legs. To do this pose:Cat-Cow pose helps relieve tension in your torso, shoulders, and neck while promoting blood circulation and spinal mobility.To do this pose:A variation on the standard Cat-Cow, this standing posture helps loosen up tightness in your back, hips, and glutes.To do this pose: Opening and stretching your chest is especially useful if you spend most of your day sitting, which tends to make your chest move inward. To do this stretch:High planks help relieve pain and stiffness throughout your body while strengthening your shoulders, glutes, and hamstrings. They also help develop balance and strength in your core and back, both important for good posture.To do this exercise:A variation on the standard plank, this move works the muscles in your sides and glutes. Strengthening and aligning these muscles helps support your back and improve posture.To do this exercise:Downward-Facing Dog is a forward bend that can be used as a resting pose to balance out the body. It can help relieve back pain, while also strengthening and aligning your back muscles.To do this pose:This hip-opening posture can also loosen up your spine, hamstrings, and glutes. To do this pose:Gently opening the chest and rotating the spine relieves tightness while increasing stability and mobility.To do this stretch: Glute bridges help strengthen and activate your glutes while relieving lower back pain. This improves the functioning and alignment of your hips and pelvis, leading to better posture.To do this exercise: Isometric pulls work your shoulder, arm, and back muscles, giving you the strength to maintain good posture.To do this exercise:It’s possible to make improvements, but it’s important to manage expectations. Change won’t happen overnight. If you aren’t noticing progress after a few weeks of consistent stretching and intentional practice, consult with a healthcare professional. They might recommend x-rays to examine the shape and alignment of your spine.The best exercise is one that you’re comfortable doing on a regular basis. This may mean trying a variety of different yoga postures, stretches, and other exercises designed to stretch and lengthen the spine.Many people see improvements within a couple of weeks, but it requires commitment and consistency. Ready to see how this all fits into an exercise plan? Check out our guide to better posture in 30 days.Paying attention to how you sit and how you stand is the best way to notice and correct slouching. Allowing your shoulders to relax and pull back slightly can help with rounding or a hunched-over stance.You might find it helpful to imagine an invisible piece of string gently pulling your head toward the ceiling. Your head should be level with your ears over your shoulders.Building and maintaining good posture requires a mix of muscle strength, joint mobility, and overall balance. Staying active, practicing body awareness, and wearing supportive shoes can help. If you usually spend a lot of time sitting, you might find it helpful to modify your space to be more ergonomic. Finding ways to work in more movement, like walking around the room at the top of the hour, may also be beneficial. Last medically reviewed on  July 13, 2023Our experts continually monitor the health and wellness space, and we update our articles when new information becomes available.Current VersionJul 13, 2023Written ByEmily CronkletonEdited ByTess CatlettMedically Reviewed ByAmy Elizabeth Wolkin, PT, DPT, MBACopy Edited ByCopy EditorsMay 29, 2020
Written ByEmily CronkletonEdited ByElizabeth DonovanVIEW ALL HISTORY Share this articlePosture affects our lives in many ways. From curing headaches to building self-confidence, here are 12 ways good posture can help us. Plus you’ll…Your posture has a major impact on your health, but most people don't know how to sit with good posture. Here's how to get started.There are several different types of posture, and certain ones may cause health issues. Block vertebrae is a congenital condition that happens when two or more of your vertebrae are fused together. Learn about symptoms, risk factors…Dexamethasone injections have been shown to reduce back pain but not without side effects to consider. Let's look deeper.Most research mentions lower back pain as a symptom of adenomyosis. Anecdotally, some people report pain in the middle and upper part of their back.Having all three of these symptoms at once narrows down the possible causes to just a few possibilities. Here's what you need to know.Certain symptoms after a fall indicate a trip to the emergency room is necessary. If you have lower back pain, several doctors and specialists can help. Learn more about orthopedists, pain specialists, chiropractors, and more.Back pain can linger longer than you'd like due to re-injury, disease, or a nerve root under pressure. Learn how to keep your pain from becoming…OUR BRANDS