Jump to content
In-person care for minor illnesses.In-person care for moderate illnesses and injuries.Virtual care with a Walk-In Care clinician.Ongoing care and wellness for everyone.Resources for vaccination and boosters.Get personalized, coordinated care across Northern California through the Sutter network.Make appointments, message your doctor and more through our patient portal.Access award-winning, comprehensive primary and specialty care for your whole family.Convenient care options for your everyday health needs.Our contributions to medical research and education lead to better healthcare outcomes.Join our robust training programs led by nationally known healthcare leaders.Explore the ways we provide innovative, compassionate care through our network.Shape the future of healthcare and build your career within our diverse teams.Get personalized, coordinated care across Northern California through the Sutter network.Make appointments, message your doctor and more through our patient portal.Make appointments, message your doctor and more through our patient portal.Access award-winning, comprehensive primary and specialty care for your whole family.Convenient care options for your everyday health needs. Our contributions to medical research and education lead to better healthcare outcomes.Join our robust training programs led by nationally known healthcare leaders.Join our robust training programs led by nationally known healthcare leaders.Explore the ways we provide innovative, compassionate care through our network.Shape the future of healthcare and build your career within our diverse teams.Shape the future of healthcare and build your career within our diverse teams.Learn the four basic numbers you should know to assess your health.ContributorSutter East Bay Medical FoundationYou can rattle off your cell phone and Social Security numbers without a second thought. But can you recite the numbers that add up to good health: Your blood pressure, cholesterol levels, blood sugar level and body mass index?These four measurements are crucial indicators of your overall health, especially related to the risk for heart attack and stroke. Unlike your family history, ethnicity and gender – which cannot be changed – these factors can be altered by the choices you make every day.“Disease prevention is a numbers game that you can often control,” says Joline Heo, M.D., an internal medicine physician with Sutter East Bay Medical Foundation. “If your blood pressure, cholesterol, weight and other numbers are higher than normal, you can take steps to lower them — before your health becomes compromised.”On the flip side, if your numbers are within a healthy range, you know you’re on track with your current healthy lifestyle habits.Having high blood pressure, cholesterol and blood sugar often causes few, if any, symptoms at first. The only way to know your levels is to measure them. Talk with your doctor about health screenings you may need, especially if you have a family history of heart disease, stroke or diabetes. The American Heart Association recommends that you begin heart health screenings at age 20 and repeat them every 4-6 years. If you have a family history of heart disease or other specific risk factors, your doctor may recommend more frequent screening.Here are the four types of numbers everyone should know—and why.Blood PressureYour healthy target:Why it matters: Your blood pressure is the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. If it’s too high, your heart has to work harder. Over time, high blood pressure can cause your heart to enlarge or weaken. This can lead to heart failure. High blood pressure can also narrow your arteries, which disrupts proper blood flow to your heart or brain and can trigger a heart attack or stroke.Blood CholesterolYour healthy target:Why it matters: Cholesterol is a fatty substance found in your body’s cells. It helps your body make important vitamins and hormones. But too much cholesterol can lead to plaque buildup inside your blood vessels. This sticky substance causes your arteries to harden and narrow, which limits blood flow. These blockages can create a heart attack or, if they’re located in the brain, a stroke.Fasting Blood GlucoseYour healthy target:Why it matters: Your body breaks down food into glucose, which cells absorb for energy. When this process goes awry, glucose builds up in the blood. Extra sugar in your bloodstream is a sign of diabetes, a disease that can harm every organ in your body, while also damaging nerves and blood vessels.Body Mass IndexYour healthy targetWhy it matters: Your BMI is a weight-height calculation that can help determine if you’re overweight or obese. “Excess body fat increases your risk for a wide range of health problems, including high blood pressure, heart disease, type 2 diabetes and sleep apnea,” Dr. Heo says. A BMI over 30 is especially dangerous to your overall health.Your doctor says one or more of your vital health numbers is too high. Now what?Whether you need to lower your blood pressure, cholesterol, glucose or BMI, these five steps can help you get back on track.Look up helpful health information.
Practical info for Sutter patients.Online tools to help you make decisions about your health.Check-ups, screenings and sick visits for adults and children.Expertise and advanced technologies in all areas of medicine.For serious accidents, injuries and conditions that require immediate medical care.After-hours, weekend and holiday services.Convenient walk-in care clinics for your non-urgent health needs.Copyright © 2023 Sutter Health. All rights reserved. Sutter Health is a registered
               trademark of Sutter Health ®, Reg. U.S. Patent & Trademark office.
               									We use cookies to give you the best possible user experience. 
        By continuing to use the site, you agree to the use of cookies. 
        Privacy Policy 
        Cookie Preferences
               						