ER Wait Time
Emergency and Trauma at Miami Valley HospitalAnswer a few questions and we'll provide you with a list of primary care providers that best fit your needs.“I’ve got heartache by the numbers…” So goes the chorus of an old country song, which concludes with this lament: “But the day that I stop counting, that's the day my world will end.”These lyrics don’t just apply to heartbreak — they also apply to heart health. While it can’t protect you from a broken heart, getting tested regularly and tracking your numbers — from cholesterol to body mass index (BMI) to blood
    sugar — will keep your heart healthier and help keep your world from ending way too soon.Here are five crucial measurements you need to know in order to keep your heart in prime shape:There are two measurements in a
    blood pressure reading. The upper number is systolic pressure, which is the force of your blood against your artery walls when your heart beats. The lower number is diastolic pressure, which represents
    the force of your blood against the artery walls when your heart is at rest between beats.Here’s how you know whether your blood pressure is in a healthy range:FamilyDoctor.org recommends that you check your blood pressure at least once every two years after the age of 18; more often if you’ve had high blood pressure before. The higher your blood pressure, the more often you need to check it.The American Heart Association (AHA) recommends that all adults 20 or older have their
    cholesterol checked every four to six years. To measure cholesterol, your doctor will order a “fasting” blood test, in which you don’t eat or drink anything for nine to 12 hours prior to testing. The report from your test will show your cholesterol levels in milligrams per deciliter
    of blood (mg/dL). The report will include the following numbers:According to the National Institutes of Health, a desirable cholesterol level for women is 200 mg/dL. A result of 200-239 is considered borderline high, and more than 240 is high.But the AHA emphasizes that risk factors, like age, family history, smoking history, and blood pressure, must be considered when deciding what a “desirable” level is for you. Your doctor will take this into consideration when looking at your
    test results, and from that will recommend the prevention and treatment plan that’s best for you.Your resting heart rate (resting pulse) is the number of times your heart beats per minute when your body is at rest. According to the AHA, what’s “normal” varies from person to person, and knowing yours can be an important gauge of
    your heart health.Checking your pulse is usually pretty simple. The easiest place to find it is at the inside of your wrist, but you can also try the inside of your elbow, the side of your neck or the top of your foot.
    Then, put your finger over it and count the number of beats in 60 seconds. If you’re sitting or lying down, and you’re calm, relaxed and not sick, your resting pulse is normally between 60 and 100 beats per minute. A resting pulse lower than 60 isn’t necessarily a concern. If you’re physically very active,
    or athletic, your pulse may be lower because your heart is in better shape and doesn’t need to work as hard to maintain a steady beat. Some medications, like beta blockers, can also slow down your pulse.However, if your pulse is abnormally low (under 40), or you frequently have unexplained rapid heart rates, and either one of these conditions makes you feel weak, dizzy, or faint, tell your doctor right away. She can decide whether it qualifies as an
    emergency.Body mass index (BMI) simply tells you whether you have too much body fat, based on a calculation that compares your weight to your height. You can learn how to calculate BMI here. Or, use our handy online BMI calculator.Once you have your number, what does it tell you? The higher your BMI, the greater your risk of developing heart disease and diabetes. Here are how the numbers shake out:While
 glucose levels are an indicator of diabetes, they also help predict heart health. That’s because people with diabetes have a higher-than-average risk of having a heart attack or stroke.If your doctor orders a fasting blood glucose test (no food or drink for nine to 12 hours before testing), here’s what the results mean:If you had a random blood glucose test (no fasting), the levels read a bit differently:Your doctor may also order a HbA1c (A1c or glycosylated hemoglobin) test. The A1c test measures your average blood glucose control for the past two to three months. No fasting is required for the test. Here’s what the A1c levels indicate:If you are diagnosed with diabetes, your physician will work with you on a treatment plan that
 may include medication, as well as lifestyle changes. She will also ask you to take follow-up blood tests. Heart disease is the leading killer of women in the U.S., according to the Centers for Disease Control. Getting tested regularly, and keeping track of your results, can help you beat that statistic for years to come. Answer a few questions and we'll provide you with a list of primary care providers that best fit your needs. Source: American Heart Association; FamilyDoctor.org; Harvard School of Public Health; Centers for Disease Control; National Institutes of Health; Medline PlusIf your heart loses the beat, new treatment advances can get it back to a regular rhythm.There’s more than one way to give birth, however you’ve done it before!Delayed osteoarthritis treatment can lead to permanent joint damage and other serious health problems.To find a cardiologist or primary care provider, call (866) 608-FIND(866) 608-FIND or complete the form below to receive a call from our call center to schedule an appointment.Please verify you are not a robot.Set Your Location
                    *The current wait time is an estimated wait time before a person sees a physician and is not a guarantee. It is based on patient activity (how many patients are being treated and the severity of their injuries) within the last hour, and it is subject
                    to change at any moment. If you are experiencing an emergency, call 911.
                
                    Current wait times as of: 11/18/2023  1:50 PM
                © 2021 Premier Health. All rights reserved worldwide.We use cookies and similar tools to give you the best website experience. By using our site you accept our privacy policy.