
Team sports have many benefits and have a positive impact on the body, mind, and spirit. When you consider the benefits of team sports, the chances are your first thoughts will have to do with the physical fitness benefits.While it’s true that regular physical activity is essential in maintaining a healthy lifestyle, research has also shown that participating in exercise and team sports may positively affect your mental, social, and spiritual health, alongside the body.As cited by Edutopia, “team sports are said to bolster the five C’s: competence, confidence, connections, character, and caring. At the heart of this is self-esteem – an increased sense of self as a result of better social interactions, stronger relationships, and higher academic performance.”The following list includes team sport benefits, as well as advantages of incorporating regular physical activity and fitness into your daily schedule. Whether you are in elementary school, middle school, high school or college, these benefits will help you live more fully.If you’re interested in how this all plays out in team sports in high school, you may be interested in checking out this all-boys school for grades 7-12 in Carlsbad (San Diego County), California. This is a private college prep school located on a historic beachfront campus, where athletics is integral to academic excellence, leadership, and character development.Team Sports Build Spiritual Health Curious about how team sports tie in with spiritual health? For a burst of relaxation and happiness, few things are more effective than exercise.Team sports help you lower your stress level and stimulate a positive outlook and improve your overall spiritual health and feeling of well-being.In an article by The Sport Journal, they speak to the spiritual aspects of connecting to self, others, and a higher purpose that can stem from participation in team sports.On a scientific note, physical activity actually stimulates chemicals in the brain that help you feel happier and more relaxed. Regular fitness activities, exercise and playing team sports reduces the levels of cortisol and adrenaline in your body. This in turn, stimulates the production of endorphins and leads you to feel more “centered” as a person.Want to improve your grades? Studies frequently demonstrate the positive impact that playing a team sport can have on academic achievement.Research conducted by various fitness institutes indicates that physical exercise leads to enhanced creativity, better memory, and concentration, and even maximized problem-solving skills. This set of cognitive benefits contributes significantly to strong academic performance, all real advantages of playing team sports.Students who play team sports often experience these benefits:Team Sports Build Strong Individuals Interested in becoming a stronger person? Almost every study reveals benefits in competence, character, confidence, and other critical components of positive personal growth and development.Because of this, it’s clear that the various facets of playing team sports, from the discipline of training to the balance provided by teamwork, provides a foundation for character development and core competencies.Interested in making new friends or expanding your social circle? Team sport advantages include: increased opportunities for social interactions and the development of strong friendships centered around common goals.Playing a sport as part of a team requires persistence, patience, and practice with yourself and others. Working within a team can help you improve your communication skills and much more.Perhaps it goes without saying that you will improve your overall physical health. As a result of team sports and fitness participation, you will probably also begin to monitor your sleep and nutrition to optimize athletic performance. Here are some direct outcomes of staying physically active in team sports or other types of fitness programs.Want to make an impact on society? Research into careers and the people who achieve greater success in their chosen occupation have found that 95% of individuals at the level of executive vice president in 75 Fortune 500 companies played sports during their school years. This really underscores the importance of team sports in high school and college.What’s more, research cited by the University of Oregon from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth found that 32-year-old men who played sports in school were paid wages 31% higher than those who hadn’t played sports.Though it’s impossible to guarantee that playing team sports will help you generate a higher income, it is possible to suggest that the development of hard work, discipline, determination, and leadership skills can help you achieve more in life and have a greater impact on society.Are you checking out team sports at private schools near you? If you are currently looking for a private school, consider all the athletic options.There is a whole world of private schools out there with different approaches to athletics. While some public and private schools offer a traditional array of team sports, some boarding schools in the U.S., for instance, have a long list of athletic choices for each season.There is even an all-boys boarding school on the beachfront with a surf team! Private school team sports often include: baseball, basketball, football, lacrosse, soccer, water polo, and hockey.Tips to Find the Best Private School for Team SportsNow that we have reviewed the many benefits and advantages of team sports, hopefully, you will be more informed in making sports and fitness choices. Get involved early by playing team sports from elementary school through high school. It will pay off when you go off to college and need to navigate mental, physical, social, and spiritual pursuits. Guaranteed, you will feel better, do better, and live a happier life!Related Articles: Find the Right Prep School for Basketball Why Lacrosse is the Sport of Choice of Today’s Youth Why a Disciplined Lifestyle Will do Wonders for Your Child in College 
Academics: 760.547.5196
Admission: 888.762.2338
Operations: 760.547.5228
Located on a beachfront campus in Southern California's Carlsbad Village, Army and Navy Academy is a college preparatory school with boarding and day options.Geared exclusively for boys in grades 7-12, we are a model school for boys in middle and high school and are ranked in the top five boarding schools in California. We are accepting applications for Spring admission. Apply HERE.