Dietary needs change during each stage of life. A nutritious, balanced eating plan can help ensure you're getting enough essential nutrients to maintain optimal health or manage health conditions. Plus, learn about the latest nutrition trends and how mental health is connected to physical health.
The page you are trying to reach was not found. This can occur when content has been archived (or if your link has a typo).   eatright.org HomepageLooking for credible nutrition information and recommendations? The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics' network of credentialed food and nutrition practitioners are ready to help!
                            We use cookies to optimize and personalize your experience, provide relevant content and analyze online traffic. We also share information with our analytics and website partners, who may use it to inform decisions about current or future services. By clicking “agree,” you consent to use cookies if you continue to our website. You can manage your cookie settings by clicking the "cookie preferences" button.
                        We use cookies to optimize and personalize your experience, provide relevant content and analyze online traffic. We also share information with our analytics and website partners, who may use it to inform decisions about current or future services. By clicking “Agree” below, you consent to use cookies if you continue to our website.You can customize your cookie preferences by using the settings next to "Analytical Cookies" and "Marketing Cookies." Click the "Save Preferences" button to save your customized settings. You can access and change your cookie preferences at any time by clicking "Data Protection Settings" icon in the lower left corner of our website. For more detailed information on the cookies we use, please visit the Academy's Privacy Policy.
                    
                            Necessary cookies enable core functionality. The website cannot function properly without these cookies, and can only be displayed by changing your browser preferences.
                        Analytical cookies help us to improve our website by collecting and reporting information on its usage.
                                We use some social sharing plugins, to allow you to share certain pages of our website on social media. These plugins place cookies so that you can correctly view how many times a page has been shared.
                            